document_id	source	date	clean_text
PUBMED_42714421	 and ""planning"" with the weights of 0.379	 ""management commitment""	 0.199
<span>New cases and deaths attributable to EVD continue to be reported by the Ministries of Health in Guinea	 and Sierra Leone. Between 2 and 4 August 2014	 Nigeria	 108 new cases (laboratory-confirmed
<span>As of 24 October 2012	 25 have been fatal (12 confirmed	 17 probable) with Ebola haemorrhagic fever (EHF) have been reported in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Of these	 13 probable).</span></p>
<span>As of 4 August 2014	 495 cases (351 confirmed	 including 932 deaths. The distribution and classification of the cases are as follows: Guinea	 133 probable
<span>Nearly all cases have been reported from the port city of Pointe Noire	 Bouenza	 Kayes	 Brazzaville
<div></div>  <p>Currently	 Uganda	 particularly to the neighboring countries also remains high due to the continuation of these outbreaks close to international borders. This risk is magnified by known population movements between the affected areas of Democratic Republic of the Congo	 Central African Republic
WHO_3	2016</a></li><li><a href=""https://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/keypopulations-2016/en/"">Consolidated Guidelines on HIV Prevention	 World Health Organization	 Diagnosis
<span>WHO has received reports of laboratory-confirmed cases originating in the following countries in the Middle East to date: Jordan	 and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). France	 Saudi Arabia	 Germany
<span>This is China’s seventh laboratory-confirmed human case. Of these cases	 Anhui	 China has reported human cases in six provinces and regions: Hunan	 Guangxi
<span>On 10 September 2014	 Colorado	 130 laboratory-confirmed cases of EV-D68 have been reported in 12 US states – Alabama	 Illinois
PUBMED_42725358	 Kor-GLASS has strengthened international surveillance and One Health collaboration capacities through its designation and redesignation as a WHO Collaborating Centre for AMR Surveillance. CONCLUSIONS: Over the past decade	 thereby supporting both national and global AMR surveillance efforts. Furthermore	 Kor-GLASS has served as the cornerstone of national antimicrobial resistance surveillance
<span>Between 2 and 4 August 2014	 and suspect cases) as well as 45 deaths were reported from Guinea	 probable	 Liberia
<span>National and District Ebola Task Forces were coordinated by the MoH to respond to the outbreak. MoH worked closely with WHO and other agencies which included the African Field Epidemiology Network (AFENET)	 Uganda Red Cross Society (URCS)	 Infectious Diseases Institute (IDI)	 Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF)
<h5 class=""section_head3"">Confirmed	 Liberia	 and suspect cases and deaths from Ebola virus disease in Guinea	 Nigeria
PUBMED_42710278	 Hyalomma asiaticum	 Hyalomma anatolicum	 Rh. turanicus
<span>Subsequent information from the Chinese government about the magnitude of the SARS outbreaks in Beijing and Shanxi Province has been carefully reviewed by WHO. This assessment has considered the magnitude of the outbreak	 and evidence that travellers are becoming infected while in one area and then subsequently exporting the disease elsewhere. On the basis of this assessment	 the extent of local chains of transmission	 WHO is extending its 2 April travel advice to include Beijing and Shanxi Province.</span></p>
<span>As a result of ongoing assessments as to the nature of outbreaks of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Beijing and Shanxi Province	 Canada	 and in Toronto	 WHO is now recommending
PUBMED_42776594	 with substantial clonal spread	 as plasmid-mediated virulence and resistance gene exchange occurs in wastewater and other aquatic habitats. Hospital effluents serve as the main hotspot for CRKp discharge	 according to research from regional wastewater networks. Selective pressures from heavy metals
<span>Using the same criteria	 their families and other close person-to-person contacts	 Canada. The outbreak in this area has continued to grow in magnitude and has affected groups outside the initial risk groups of hospital workers	 although all the cases reported have identified links to known SARS cases. In addition
WHO_47	 including one associated death (CFR 0.14%) have been reported from seven districts in western Nepal (Banke &ndash; 327 cases; Surkhet&ndash; 62 cases; Bardiya &ndash; 49 cases; Kailali &ndash; 39 cases; Kanchanpur &ndash; 27 cases; Bajura &ndash; 13 cases	 a total of 690 measles cases	 and Dang &ndash; 12 cases)
<li>A 39-year-old female health-care worker	 no history of travel	 who was screened as part of contact investigation. She was asymptomatic; MERS-CoV was confirmed by the laboratory on the 25 April 2014. She has a history of exposure to a confirmed case of MERS-CoV notified to WHO on 18 April 2014. She has no comorbidities	 and no contact with animals.</li>
<li>A 41-year old male hospital employee residing in Abu Dhabi. He was asymptomatic	 no significant travel history	 he tested positive for MERS-CoV and was admitted to hospital on 22 April. He was discharged on 27 April 2014. He has no comorbidities	 and no contact with animals</li>
PUBMED_42693945	 control	 investigate	 and prevent the spread of infectious diseases in the United States falls to states. CONTEXT: Over the last decade
<span>A mission briefing with representatives from Member States was held on 5 August at the World Health Organization (WHO). Information about the nature of Ebola virus disease (EVD) was highlighted. This was followed by outlining the essential components for control	 identifying transmission chains and stopping disease spread	 improved care and case management	 and preventing further outbreaks. Among the critical issues are: cross-border infections and travelers; partners reaching the limits of their capacity and ability to respond rapidly
<span>On 22 April 2014	 dyspnoea	 he was diagnosed with pneumonia and was admitted to the hospital on 30 April 2014. His symptoms included fever	 and productive cough. On 2 May 2014
PUBMED_42779239	 such as drinking raw water and consuming raw or undercooked fish	 which facilitated the aggregation and diffusion of the risk of C. sinensis infection in the community. CONCLUSIONS: Individual dietary behaviors	 and sociocultural factors of household-neighborhood food-sharing networks
<span>The following cases of laboratory confirmed Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) have been reported from Jordan	 the United Arab Emirates	 the Netherlands	 and the United States of America.</span></p>
PUBMED_42771855	 there is a lack of rigorous causal evidence regarding the spillover effects of cancer onset	"" can negatively affect the mental health of spouses or partners through negative spillover effects. However	 and the dynamic pattern remains unclear. This study aims to assess the spillover effects of cancer onset on spousal depressive symptoms using a multicohort approach and examine the moderating role of a healthy lifestyle. METHODS: We conducted a pooled multicountry analysis utilizing 21 countries datasets. We employed a causal inference research design
WHO_45	 district leaders	 the MoH provided recommendations to health      workers	 and the public to strengthen detection of      suspected cases and implement appropriate infection
<li>A 30-year old male UAE national	 but he was clinically stable	 he went to the emergency room with cough and shortness of breath	 and was treated as an outpatient. On 25 April
PUBMED_42752633	 coupled with human activities	 yet their prevalence and importance are increasing at an alarming rate. Complex interactions among different host organisms	 anthropogenic environmental impacts
</li></ul><p><span>The 18 cases of MERS-CoV infection reported during this time period are from three regions of the country. At the time of writing	 including direct and/or indirect contact with dromedaries	 five reported contact with dromedaries and one is a close contact of a known case. Investigations into the source of infection for each case	 are ongoing.</span></p><p><span>Globally
<span>People at high risk of severe disease due to MERS-CoV should avoid close contact with animals when visiting farms or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. For the general public	 such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals	 general hygiene measures	 avoiding contact with sick animals
<span>On 23 August	 and vomiting. He received treatment for malaria	 diarrhoea	 but did not improve and left the facility.</span></p>
<span>There are five identified subtypes of Ebola virus. The subtypes have been named after the location where they were been first detected in EHF outbreaks. Three subtypes of the five have been associated with large EHF outbreaks in Africa. Ebola-Zaire	 can infect humans	 found in the Philippines	 but no illness or death in humans has been reported to date.</span></p>
<span>Currently	 sneezing	 runny nose	 cough
PUBMED_42727023	 longitudinal reservoir surveillance	"" with unrecognized or mild MARV infections occurring outside confirmed outbreak chains. Critical preparedness gaps persist in ecological risk mapping	 decentralized molecular diagnostics
WHO_28	 and a history of wild bird presence around her home. No close contacts of the case developed an infection or symptoms of illness at the time of reporting. </p><p>Environmental samples were collected from the patient's residence and the wet market where the patient spent time before the onset of illness. The results of testing showed that the samples collected from the wet market were positive for influenza A(H3).<strong></strong></p> <p>Zoonotic influenza infections in humans may be asymptomatic or may cause disease. Depending on factors related to the specific virus and the infected host	 the National Health Commission of the People&rsquo;s Republic of China notified WHO of one confirmed case of human infection with an avian influenza A(H3N8) virus. The patient was a 56-year-old female from Guangdong province with an onset of illness on 22 February 2023. She was hospitalized for severe pneumonia on 3 March 2023 and subsequently died on 16 March 2023.</p><p>The case was detected through the severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) surveillance system. The patient had multiple underlying conditions. She had a history of exposure to live poultry before the onset of the disease	 disease can range from conjunctivitis or mild flu-like symptoms to severe acute respiratory disease or even death. Gastrointestinal or neurological symptoms have been reported but these are rare.</p><p>Human cases of infection with avian influenza viruses are usually the result of direct or indirect exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments.</p> <p>Avian influenza A(H3N8) viruses are commonly detected globally in animals. Influenza A(H3N8) viruses are some of the most commonly found subtypes in birds
PUBMED_42674630	 driven by the selectively enriched electroactive	 moderate potential differences (0.5 and 0.8 V) achieved superior total nitrogen (79.5-80.1%) and substantial CAP (90.9-92.5%) removal	 dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium and CAP-degrading bacteria (e.g.
PUBMED_42682458	 the rapid onset of pulmonary dysfunction following brain injury has been attributed to the ""massive catecholamine release""-a massive	 with the lungs being the most directly and fatally affected distant organs. Traditionally	 dysregulated release of catecholamines leading to intense systemic vasoconstriction
PUBMED_42752211	 confirming active zoonotic transmission. The results demonstrate the coexistence of both lineages	 a fundamental question driving this study was whether local isolates belonged to international lineages or represented endemic strains. This study provides the first comprehensive genomic characterization demonstrating that two Colombian endemic lineages circulate simultaneously between humans and pigs without phylogenetic separation by host species	 each with distinctive repertoires of mobile genetic elements and specific antimicrobial resistance profiles. Understanding these transmission dynamics and evolutionary patterns is crucial for public health
WHO_26	 with no associated deaths. </p><p>Between 29 December 2021 and 31 October 2022	 the IHR National Focal Point of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has reported four additional cases	 four cases of locally acquired Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection were reported from Riyadh (two cases)
WHO_41	 was reported on 28 January 2024	 a 69-year-old	 from Puok district
WHO_16	 sans-serif;font-size:16px;text-align:inherit;text-transform:inherit;word-spacing:normal;caret-color:auto;white-space:inherit;"">As of October 2018	 Helvetica	 genetically-linked circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) isolates were detected in two cases from Haut-Katanga province (Mufunga-Sampwe district) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The first case was a 11-year old child who experienced onset of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) on 6 October. The second case was a 29-month old child who experienced onset of symptoms on 7 October
<div></div>  <p><p>Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far	 following contact with dromedaries) or human source (for example	 and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to animals or animal products (for example	 in a health care setting). WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.</p></p> <p>Based on the current situation and available information
<div></div>  <p>Infection with MERS-CoV can cause severe disease resulting in high mortality. Humans are infected with MERS-CoV from direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels. MERS-CoV has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far	 following contact with camels) or human source (for example	 and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to animals or animal products (for example	 in a health care setting). WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information.<br /></p> <p>Based on the current situation and available information
<span>The patient developed first symptoms on 1 May 2014 while in Medina	 his condition deteriorated	 on 10 May	 including development of respiratory symptoms
PUBMED_42682494	 monitoring and evaluation of the impacts of such programmes is limited and there can be a tendency to equate numbers of dogs sterilised with success. The aim of this study was to examine practitioners perspectives on the role of sterilisation in managing FRD populations	 used predominantly with the aim of reducing or stabilising the population. However	 including insights into its perceived benefits and limitations
PUBMED_42775567	 high-risk resistance plasmids carrying blaNDM-5 and tet(X4) are detected	 revealing regional epidemic features and high susceptibility in young children. The multidrug-resistant monophasic ST34 clone is identified as the predominant strain. Notably	 indicating hidden horizontal transmission risks of critical antibiotic resistance. Global phylogeny verifies the China-specific expansion of local ST34 strains with cross-regional and zoonotic potential. These findings underscore the severe threat of MDR NTS in tropical island areas
<span>On 27 August	 issued an alert	 Guinea	 informing medical services in Guinea and neighbouring countries
<span>The Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ) from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) continues to work with local	 as well as with the airlines to obtain the passenger manifests from the flights to help identify	 and international partners	 locate
<span>The Ministry of Health (MoH) continues to work with local health authorities and international partners in active surveillance	 management of patients in health care facilities	 infection prevention and control in health care settings	 logistics
PUBMED_42707867	 host response	 gaps remain in integrating ecological context	 longitudinal data
PUBMED_42774971	122 dogs were included. Malignant tumors accounted for 59.3% of cases. Skin (38.4%)	823 primary tumors from 9	 mammary gland (23.2%)
<li>A 38 year-old female administrative officer in a health clinic from Abu Dhabi who became ill on 20 April 2014. She was admitted to hospital on 26 April 2014. Initial laboratory tests for MERS-CoV were negative for the virus	 but is also to have no history of travel	 the patient is in the ICU in a critical but stable situation. She has several comorbidities	 no contact with laboratory confirmed cases or with animals
<li>A 51-year old male Omani national	 developed fever on 18 April 2014. He was admitted to the hospital on 20 April 2014. On 23 April 2014 he tested positive for MERS-CoV. He is currently in hospital in isolation in a stable condition. The patient has comorbidities	 Oman	 no history of travel
<span>On 4 March 2014	 China	 Hong Kong SAR	 notified WHO of an additional laboratory-confirmed case of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus.</span></p>
<span>The Ministry of Health (MoH)	 a total of 24 probable and confirmed cases were recorded	 the end of the Ebola haemorrhagic fever (EHF) outbreak in Kibaale district. The last case was confirmed on 3 August 2012 and was discharged from the hospital on 24 August 2012. This is double the maximum incubation period (21 days) for Ebola as recommended by WHO. In the outbreak	 of which 11 were laboratory confirmed by the Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) in Entebbe. A total of 17 deaths were reported in this outbreak. </span></p>
of intense headache	 and vomiting	 nausea	 photophobia and stiff neck. The
PUBMED_42779235	 it is still necessary to enhance the long-term cross-sectoral coordination mechanism	 the transmission of schistosomiasis was interrupted across China in 2023. To achieve the goal of schistosomiasis elimination and sustainably consolidate the achievements of elimination in China	 promote interdisciplinary collaboration for innovating control technologies and strategies
PUBMED_42694895	 along with the characteristic time-related histopathological changes and its presence within normal myocardium	 the circumferential and multifocal nature of this disease	 provide further evidence that TS/ANCA syndrome is a disorder of the cardiac sympathetic nerve terminals. Therefore
<div></div>  <p>Sporadic cases of infection acquired following sexual activity have already been reported in the past. These cases of sexual transmission do not change the overall risk assessment since the virus continues to be primarily transmitted to people through mosquito bites. The risk of a global spread of Zika virus to areas where the competent vectors	 given the wide geographical distribution of these mosquitoes in various regions of the world. WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conduct risk assessment based on the latest available information.&nbsp;</p> <p>The proximity of mosquito vector breeding sites to human habitation is a significant risk factor for Zika virus infection. Prevention and control relies on reducing the breeding of mosquitoes through source reduction (removal and modification of breeding sites) and reducing contact between mosquitoes and people. This can be achieved by reducing the number of natural and artificial water-filled habitats that support mosquito larvae	 are present is significant	 reducing the adult mosquito populations around at-risk communities and by using barriers such as insect screens
PUBMED_42671199	 causing huge losses in domestic poultry	 these viruses have expanded their host range	 spreading among wild bird populations
WHO_25	 sans-serif;font-size:16px;text-align:inherit;text-transform:inherit;word-spacing:normal;caret-color:auto;white-space:inherit;"">From 1 June through 16 September 2018	 Helvetica	 the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) National Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported 32 additional cases of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)
WHO_32	 sans-serif;font-size:16px;text-align:inherit;text-transform:inherit;word-spacing:normal;caret-color:auto;white-space:inherit;"">On 17 April 2016	 Helvetica	 the National IHR Focal Point of Peru notified PAHO/WHO of a confirmed case of sexual transmission of Zika virus. This is the country&rsquo;s first case of Zika virus infection.</span><br /></div><p><span>The case is a 32-year-old woman from Lima province
WHO_14	 sans-serif;font-size:16px;text-align:inherit;text-transform:inherit;word-spacing:normal;caret-color:auto;white-space:inherit;"">Between 18 and 21 July 2015	 Helvetica	 the National IHR Focal Point of the Republic of Korea notified WHO of no additional cases of infection and no new deaths related to Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV).</span><br /></div><h3 class=""section_head1"">Additional information on the outbreak in the Republic of Korea</h3><p><span>To date
PUBMED_42728358	 and the environment. Although BDBV is not a new pathogen	 animals	 the lack of licensed medical interventions and limited investment in research reflect many of the vulnerabilities associated with the concept of ""Disease X.""[9]. Unlike Zaire Ebola Virus
PUBMED_42730050	 20 unprompted implementation proposals indicated that the co-design format activated strategic action competence not fully captured by current One Health competency models. Although the findings are exploratory and limited to a single cohort at two Austrian institutions	 32.5% of coded material fell outside the NEOH framework. Within this beyond-NEOH material	 the study suggests that structured interprofessional co-design between veterinary researchers and education professionals can create meaningful opportunities for developing the societal engagement capacities that One Health demands."
<span>On 6 August	 whether the Ebola virus disease outbreak constitutes a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Experts will receive an epidemiological briefing and will determine whether the criteria for a PHEIC have been met. If the Emergency Committee agrees that this is a PHEIC	 in accordance with the International Health Regulations	 they will then advise the Director-General on temporary recommendations. A summary of the meeting will be made public and a press briefing will be held on Friday
<span>Both countries are continuing synchronized	 and in the affected areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Equateur and Bandundu provinces) on 25 July	 supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) were launched nationwide in Angola	 to reach more than 8 million children under the age of five years. Further immunization campaigns will be conducted later in the year.</span></p>
WHO_22	 including five deaths. Additionally	 the National IHR Focal Point of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reported 18 additional cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection	 two deaths from a previously reported case were reported to WHO.</span><br /></p></div><h3 class=""section_head1"">Details of the cases</h3><p><span>Detailed information concerning the cases reported can be found in a separate document (see link below).</span></p><ul><li><a href=""https://www.who.int/entity/csr/don/19-december-2017-mers-saudi-arabia.xls"" class=""link_media"">MERS-CoV case reported between 31 October and 8 December 2017<br /><span class=""link_info"">xls
PUBMED_42758459	 we estimated how freed time is reallocated to paid work	"" we established a QALY-composition approximation. Using nationally representative time-use data	 unpaid work
<span>The Government of Congo has alerted the public to the outbreak and launched an emergency response plan	 UNICEF and the US CDC. At least three nationwide vaccination campaigns are expected	 including WHO	 using monovalent oral polio vaccine and targeting the entire population. The number
PUBMED_42671198	 including bacteria	 we determined the minimal effective antimicrobial concentration of aPAA for a wide range of agents	 viruses
PUBMED_42729580	 but its empirical basis and the conditions under which it operates remain incompletely understood. Here	 has been widely invoked in debates on the management of free-roaming dogs and other urban animals	 we review the conceptual foundations and available evidence for replacement dynamics in free-roaming dog populations
<span>Following a request by the Chinese Ministry of Health	 were researchers at the institute	 including the earliest case	 which has been conducting work using the live SARS coronavirus.</span></p>
PUBMED_42678165	 and specific tool for the precise detection and differentiation of B. anthracis strains in China.IMPORTANCEAnthrax	 sensitive	 which is caused by the bacterium B. anthracis
<span>EV-D68 is identified using molecular techniques at a limited number of laboratories in the USA. Enterovirus infections	 but laboratory detections of enterovirus and parechovirus types are reported voluntarily to the National Enterovirus Surveillance System	 are not nationally notifiable	 which is managed by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. </span></p>
<span>On 25 July 2007	 advance notification of two new polio cases was received	 bringing the total number of cases in the country this year to 26. In neighbouring Angola	 which will bring the total number of cases in Angola in 2007 to 8. The two cases are from Luanda and Benguele provinces.</span></p>
PUBMED_42710264	 with only two genuine sub-consensus events in the B3.13 background	 which never acquired the 631L mammalian adaptation	 while consensus-level PB2 701N was a fixed feature of the D1.1 genotype (10 of 14 detections) rather than independent sub-consensus emergence. Cattle exhibited significantly higher within-host nucleotide diversity than feline-spillover samples (π = 1.59 × 10-4 vs 6.11 × 10-5; Kruskal-Wallis p = 6.6 × 10-15)
<span>The 20-year-old nurse	 all cases have been linked to chains of transmission involving close contact with an identified case. The second confirmed case	 has been linked to an additional five cases. These include the one reported today and four reported on Sunday. To date	 who remains hospitalized in Anhui Province
<span>WHO’s International Travel and Health recommends that all travellers to and from polio affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Three countries remain endemic for indigenous transmission of WPV: Nigeria	 the Horn of Africa is affected by an outbreak of WPV	 in 2013	 with six cases confirmed in Kenya and Somalia. </span></p>
PUBMED_42741098	"" with the eastern and southern regions showing a significant lead. Regional disparities have remained at high levels and continue to widen	 higher in the south and lower in the north	 with the overall Gini coefficient rising from 0.4836 to 0.5285; inter-regional disparities are the primary source
PUBMED_42773359	PubMed	2026	"A comprehensive overview of the epidemiology of Toxoplasma gondii and Neospora caninum in animals from Iraq. The present study provides the first comprehensive evaluation of Toxoplasma gondii and Neospora caninum infections in Iraqi animals and birds. Data from 116 Iraqi studies were subjected to various meta-analyses, and all published Iraqi T. gondii-SAG3 and N. caninum-NC5 nucleotide sections were molecularly analyzed. For T. gondii, the pooled prevalence estimates in various animals exceeded the global averages. Cats showed a high seroprevalence (45.2%) and oocyst shedding (16.7%), suggesting a widespread environmental contamination. Sheep and goats exhibited high pooled seroprevalence (46.9% and 47.9%, respectively), and T. gondii DNA was frequently detected in sheep meat and goat milk, indicating their potential zoonotic risk. Nonetheless, limited studies tested T. gondii DNA in blood/tissues of aborted small ruminants, highlighting an important gap. Molecular analysis of 113 T. gondii isolates illustrated the predominance of the clonal types I and III, and their co-circulation among humans, animals, and birds, suggesting active zoonotic transmission. N. caninum displayed a seroprevalence of 12.3% and 8.1% in sheep and goats, respectively. N. caninum DNA was detected in aborted sheep, goats, and equines, highlighting its potential role in animal abortions in Iraq. However, N. caninum role in cattle abortions is unclear, but aborted cattle had a higher pooled N. caninum seroprevalence (21.2%) than non-aborted cattle (15.4%). Nine N. caninum haplotypes were detected across 22 isolates, with a shared haplotype between sheep and goats. These findings suggest the endemic situation of both protozoa in Iraqi animals and emphasize the need for integrated ""One Health"" surveillance to implement effective control strategies."
PUBMED_42761019	PubMed	2026	"Armed conflict: the ""perfect storm"" for One Health."
PUBMED_42699591	PubMed	2026	"Assessing the pandemic potential of Nipah virus: From molecular pathogenesis to ecological spillover risks. Nipah virus, a highly lethal zoonotic paramyxovirus with a case fatality rate of 40-75%, poses a formidable threat to global health security. This review synthesizes its evolving epidemiology, contrasting the Malaysian and Bangladesh India strains, and dissects molecular pathogenesis focusing on G/F glycoprotein recognition of ephrin receptors and the multi layered immune evasion mediated by P gene products. Phylogenetic analyses reveal 8-10% nucleotide divergence between lineages, with positive selection in the G protein that may compromise vaccine cross protection. Ecological risk amplifiers-deforestation and climate driven habitat loss-reshape spillover dynamics through spatial expansion of bat foraging, prolonged risk windows, and pathway diversification. Deforestation exceeding 5% per decade correlates with a 2-3 fold increase in spillover events in Bangladesh. A dynamic risk assessment framework is proposed that views pandemic potential as the convergence of viral evolution, ecological amplification, and geographic expansion-from South Asia to Pteropus bearing regions worldwide, including unrecognized risks in China. Current medical countermeasures (mRNA vaccines, m102.4 antibody, remdesivir) and deployment challenges (genetic diversity, biosafety level 4 constraints, regulatory dependence on the ""Animal Rule"") are evaluated. The conclusion calls for a ""One Health"" informed global defense system anchored on four pillars: intelligent forecasting that integrates ecological data; a broadly protective countermeasure repository; democratized rapid diagnostics; and translational bridges linking molecular insights to actionable interventions. Strengthening global collaboration is imperative to prevent Nipah virus from escalating into a pandemic."
PUBMED_42766043	PubMed	2026	"From laboratory to clinical application: a narrative review of bacteriophage therapy for antimicrobial-resistant infections in veterinary medicine. Antimicrobial resistance poses one of the most critical challenges to global health, particularly within veterinary medicine, where antibiotic misuse contributes significantly to multidrug-resistant infections. Bacteriophages have re-emerged as promising biocontrol agents that can target resistant pathogens while preserving host microbiota and environmental balance. However, despite growing experimental evidence, therapeutic implementation remains constrained by heterogeneous methodologies, limited clinical validation, and fragmented regulatory frameworks. This narrative review critically appraises advances in veterinary phage therapy and suggests that standardized, optimized bacteriophages may match the efficacy and biosafety of antibiotics, potentially enhancing their effectiveness in combination therapies. Latest studies report substantial pathogen reduction and, in a smaller number of cases, improved clinical outcomes in livestock (Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella enterica, Clostridium perfringens), as well as in aquaculture (Aeromonas hydrophila, Edwardsiella tarda) and apiculture (Paenibacillus larvae) models. Emerging strategies, including phage cocktails, microencapsulation, and phage-antibiotic synergy, enhance therapeutic stability but require standardized evaluation. To fully realize their potential, bacteriophage therapies must be developed within harmonized frameworks that integrate genomic surveillance, pharmacodynamic modeling, and quality-controlled production. Phage therapy should thus be viewed not as an established alternative but as a dynamic, hypothesis-driven approach capable of reshaping antimicrobial stewardship within the ""One Health"" paradigm."
PUBMED_42721830	PubMed	2026	"From regionalization to homogenization: Nationwide metagenomic assessment of priority pathogens and the resistome in Polish hospital wastewater. Hospital wastewater (HWW) is a critical hotspot for the dissemination of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) and pathogens. This study provides the first comprehensive metagenomic characterization of HWW across Poland, analyzing 64 medical facilities across two seasons via Nanopore long-read sequencing (total of 128 HWW samples). The HWW microbiome was mostly dominated by Proteobacteria, Bacteroidota, and Firmicutes. Multivariate analysis confirmed a significant seasonal shift in the resistome. Winter samples exhibited geographic regionalization, with localized hotspots of specific ARGs, including vancomycin resistance (operon van) and carbapenemase genes (blaOXA, blaNDM). Conversely, summer samples showed a significant trend toward nationwide homogenization, characterized by a uniform distribution of ESBL genes (blaTEM, blaCTX-M) and multidrug resistance (MDR) determinants, alongside the persistence of localized clinical hotspots. Klebsiella pneumoniae emerged as a central network hub, particularly in summer, showing strong correlations with ESBLs. Quantitative genomic co-occurrence analysis revealed a functional division within dominant taxa: while environmental species like Acinetobacter johnsonii comprised the general background microbiome, clinical pathogens such as Acinetobacter baumannii served as primary vectors, showing frequent associations with high-risk ARGs. Environmental and opportunistic bacteria, such as Aeromonas spp. and Citrobacter spp., were identified as putative 'bridge hosts' associated with mobile resistance determinants and potentially contributing to HGT. The findings indicate that seasonal factors, such as increased temperature and sub-inhibitory antibiotic concentrations, may contribute to the transition from regionalized to homogenized resistance profiles, demonstrating that background resistome convergence can coexist with point-source clinical outbreaks. This seasonal ""blurring"" of regional boundaries positions HWW as an active vector for large-scale antimicrobial resistance (AMR) dissemination. These results underscore the urgent need for nationwide metagenomic surveillance and advanced wastewater treatment strategies within the ""One Health"" framework to mitigate the environmental spread of WHO priority pathogens."
PUBMED_42788037	PubMed	2026	"Genomic epidemiology of Salmonella Typhimurium in Guizhou, China (2019-2023): high prevalence of MDR, plasmid-associated resistance, and shared genomic lineages. Salmonella Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) is a leading cause of bacterial gastroenteritis worldwide, and its escalating antimicrobial resistance (AMR) poses a critical threat to global public health. Nevertheless, epidemiological and genomic data for this pathogen in Guizhou Province remain limited. We integrated phenotypic and genomic analyses of 103 clinical S. Typhimurium isolates, collected from nine cities between 2019 and 2023, to characterize their genetic backgrounds, resistance mechanisms, and evolutionary dynamics. The isolates exhibited persistently high resistance to conventional antibiotics. Multidrug resistance (MDR) was universal (100% during 2019-2021), with extensively drug-resistant (XDR) isolates emerged in 2020. Substantial resistance to first-line antibiotics was also observed, including ciprofloxacin (16.5%), ceftazidime (19.4%), cefotaxime (36.9%), and azithromycin (12.6%). Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) identified 61 antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) and six distinct point mutations. Efflux pump-associated genes were widely distributed, and ARGs conferring tetracyclines and sulfonamides were detected at high frequencies. Resistance genotypes correlated well with phenotypes for azithromycin, ceftazidime, ampicillin, chloramphenicol, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and tetracycline (Kappa: 0.48-0.74). Twenty plasmid replicons were detected, with IncF (24.3%), IncI1-I (15.5%), and IncHI2 (13.6%) being the most prevalent. Notably, ARGs associated with resistance to critically important antibiotics (such as qnr variants, bla CTX-M and bla CMY-2 , and mphA/mrx) were frequently predicted to locate on plasmid-associated contigs. Plasmid diversity expanded significantly over the five-year period, particularly in economically developed cities. Molecular typing identified ST19 and its subtypes, cgST121877 (30.1%) and cgST59516 (12.6%), as the dominant clones, suggesting pronounced regional clonal expansion. Furthermore, phylogenetic analysis revealed close genetic relatedness between Guizhou clinical isolates and human- and livestock-derived isolates from other Chinese provinces. These findings highlight the cross-regional and cross-species circulation of shared genomic lineages, suggesting complex ecological networks that may involve the food supply chain. Implementing an integrated ""One Health"" surveillance strategy is critical to track and limit the circulation of these resistant lineages and mitigate the associated public health threat."
PUBMED_42765222	PubMed	2026	"Impact of Digital Financial Inclusion on Agricultural Carbon Productivity . Empirically examining the nexus between digital financial inclusion and agricultural carbon productivity provides critical insights for synergizing low-carbon agricultural transformation with China's ""dual carbon"" strategic objectives. Leveraging a provincial panel dataset 2011-2022 N 30 this study empirically tested the influence of digital financial inclusion on agricultural carbon productivity based on clarifying the characteristics of agricultural carbon productivity in Chinese provinces. The findings reveal that There were obvious differences in agricultural carbon productivity among provinces among which Shandong was the highest and Qinghai was the lowest. During the investigation period the agricultural carbon productivity of the remaining 29 provinces except Shanghai showed an obvious upward trend. The development of digital inclusive finance had a significant positive impact on the improvement of agricultural carbon productivity that is the higher the level of digital inclusive finance the higher the agricultural carbon productivity. Dimensionally financial usage depth exhibited a statistically significant positive effect on agricultural carbon productivity while neither coverage breadth nor digitization level demonstrated significant associations. In terms of regional heterogeneity digital financial inclusion in the central western and non-major grain-producing regions had a significant positive impact on agricultural carbon productivity while it had no significant impact in the eastern region and major grain-producing regions. The analysis of spatial spillover effects indicated that agricultural carbon productivity within a region was simultaneously influenced by the development of digital financial inclusion in both the local province and neighboring provinces demonstrating a positive spatial spillover effect."
PUBMED_42779247	PubMed	2026	"Imported alveolar echinococcosis in Tianzhu Tibetan Autonomous County of Gansu Province: a case report . This report presented the first imported case of alveolar echinococcosis in Tianzhu Tibetan Autonomous County, Gansu Province. The patient was a local resident who had worked in Hotan Prefecture, Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region from 2019 to 2023, an area co-endemic for cystic and alveolar echinococcosis. He presented with hepatic discomfort in June 2023. Imaging examinations revealed an 8 cm 6 cm mass in the left liver lobe, and serological testing showed positive IgG antibodies against Echinococcus. Post-surgical pathology confirmed the diagnosis of alveolar echinococcosis. Given that Tianzhu County has historically been endemic only for cystic echinococcosis and has not reported local cases of alveolar echinococcosis, this case was identified as an imported case based on epidemiological history. The case underwent left lateral hepatic lobectomy and no recurrence was seen at 2-year follow-up post-surgery. It is recommended to enhance the identification of different types of echinococcosis among clinicians, improve health education among migrant laborers, reinforce active screening among returning labors, and advance a One Health concept-based, cross-regional ""human-animal-environment"" joint prevention and control mechanism to prevent the risk of imported echinococcosis."
PUBMED_42700597	PubMed	2026	"Metagenomic analysis of florfenicol and microplastics effects on microbial function and antibiotic resistome in rice seedling rhizosphere soil. Antibiotics enrich antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) and virulence factor genes (VFGs) in farmland, but the contribution of microplastics (MPs) to this process remains unclear. Here, through metagenome analysis, we revealed the add-on effects of PE and PLA on ARGs and VFGs enrichment in rice seedling rhizosphere soil under florfenicol (FF) stress. Compared with controls, root iron plaque content decreased by 35%, 66% and 69% under FF, FF + PE and FF + PLA treatments, disrupting microbial iron balance and activating ABC transporter pathways. Loss of beneficial/core microbes weakened community resistance; bacteria were more sensitive to stress than fungi. Among 945 ARGs and 391 VFs detected, antibiotic efflux abundance rose by 184% under FF, while mobile genetic elements (MGEs) increased from 0.5% to 38.1%, facilitating horizontal ARG transfer. In addition to horizontal gene transfer (HGT) mediated by mobile genetic elements (MGEs), our finding suggests a potential mechanism by which virulence factors (VFs) may promote ARG enrichment through the accumulation of tissue-damaging free radicals. Only one ARG-carrying human pathogen existed in controls, whereas six multi-drug-resistant pathogens emerged under combined pollution. This study provides new insights into the environmental risks of the add-on effects of MPs under antibiotics stress and contributing to the ""One Health"" goal."
PUBMED_42764916	PubMed	2026	"Molecular and serological evidence of hepatitis E virus genotype 3 circulation in pigs in Senegal. OBJECTIVES: In Senegal, data on the epidemiology of hepatitis E virus (HEV) are limited, despite the emergence of a human epidemic in 2014. The objective of this study is to assess the prevalence, molecular characteristics, and seroprevalence of HEV in pigs in Senegal. METHOD: Blood samples were collected from pigs immediately after slaughter between September 2018 and December 2019. HEV RNA was detected using real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, and positive samples were subjected to Sanger sequencing targeting a fragment of approximately 300 bp of the ORF2 gene for molecular characterization. An enzyme immunoassay was performed to assess the seropositivity for anti-HEV antibody. RESULTS: Among the 1600 serum samples tested, HEV RNA was detected in 69 serum samples (4.3%). Of these, 13 were successfully sequenced, and phylogenetic analysis showed that all strains belonged to genotype 3. Among 1161 selected RT-qPCR-negative serum tested, 76.6% were positive for anti-HEV antibodies. CONCLUSION: Pigs have been identified as an important reservoir of HEV genotype 3 in Senegal, highlighting the need for integrated ""One Health"" surveillance to better understand viral circulation and assess the potential risk of zoonotic transmission."
PUBMED_42703562	PubMed	2026	"Molecular identification and phylogenetic characterization of Leptospira spp. in domestic animals from Jordan. Background: Leptospirosis is an emerging zoonotic disease-causing substantial morbidity, mortality, and economic losses worldwide, with over 60,000 human deaths annually. Early diagnosis and molecular identification of Leptospira spp. are essential for effective control and prevention. In Jordan, while serological evidence exists, there is a critical lack of molecular data regarding the species circulating in animal hosts. Objectives: This study aimed to detect Leptospira infection using nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and to characterize the isolates molecularly through sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of the 16S rRNA (rrs) gene. Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted from serum and urine samples collected between January 2020 and May 2021 from 82 animals suspected of leptospirosis, including 80 cattle, one goat, and one dog. Pooled urine from imported feedlot calves and urine from the goat and dog were analyzed. Positive Leptospira samples were identified using nested PCR targeting the rrs gene, followed by Sanger sequencing. Phylogenetic analysis was performed using MEGA software, and sequences were compared with reference serovars from GenBank. Results: Three samples (3.5%) were positive for the Leptospira rrs gene, producing the expected 299 bp amplicon. Sequencing confirmed Leptospira DNA in two samples-one from pooled urine of imported calves and one from a dog serum sample. The sequences were submitted to GenBank as ""Uncultured Leptospira spp. Canine Jordan 2020"" (OK394051) and ""Uncultured Leptospira spp. Cattle Jordan 2020"" (OK394045). Conclusions: This is the first molecular characterization of Leptospira spp. in domestic animals in Jordan. The findings underscore the need to include leptospirosis in differential diagnoses of febrile diseases and to enhance surveillance and preventive programs."
PUBMED_42743633	PubMed	2026	"Plastisphere as a resistome incubator: Substrate biodegradability escalates compounded genetic risks. Plastispheres formed on microplastics represent unique hotspots for antibiotic-resistant bacteria, yet how substrate biodegradability shapes resistome profiles remains unclear. To address this gap, this study evaluated the resistome and its associated mobility and pathogenicity risks across nine polymer-specific plastispheres and the surrounding water. Results showed that antibiotic resistance gene (ARG) enrichment was widespread across plastispheres formed on all tested substrates, following a biodegradability-driven gradient that peaked in polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA). This enrichment was systematically coupled with the co-accumulation of mobile genetic elements (MGEs) and virulence factor genes (VFGs). Host-resolved analysis revealed the selective enrichment of high-risk biomarker taxa in biodegradable plastispheres, particularly Aeromonas and Escherichia, which concurrently harbored antibiotic resistance, genetic mobility, and virulence determinants. Genetic-context analysis revealed contig-level co-localization of these determinants, indicating their potential genetic linkage. Within this structural framework, the co-occurrence of ARGs and MGEs indicated an increased potential for MGE-mediated horizontal gene transfer, whereas the enrichment of VFGs involved in environmental sensing, colonization, and nutrient acquisition suggested potential adaptation to resource competition, thereby potentially contributing to the co-selection of genetically linked ARGs. Substrate biodegradability amplifies both pathways by intensifying these spatial and competitive interactions, rendering plastispheres critical incubators for resistant pathogens in riverine ecosystems. Ultimately, this resistome expansion independent of antibiotic selective pressure reveals the potential ecological hazards of biodegradable plastics, substantiating the need for a systematic reassessment of their widespread use within the ""One Health"" framework."
PUBMED_42765246	PubMed	2026	"Spatial Correlation Network and Driving Factors of Tourism Ecological Resilience in the Yangtze River Delta Urban Agglomeration . Based on the framework of resilience theory the level of tourism ecosystem resilience is systematically evaluated and the structural characteristics and driving factors of its spatial correlation network are revealed which is of great significance for practicing the concept of green development and promoting high-quality development of the tourism industry. The level of tourism ecological resilience in the Yangtze River Delta urban agglomeration from 2008 to 2022 is measured using a comprehensive level evaluation model and its spatial network characteristics and driving factors are revealed by using the modified gravity model core-edge analysis method spatiotemporal geographic weighted regression spatial econometric and threshold model. The results show that The tourism ecological resilience of the Yangtze River Delta urban agglomeration presented the spatial correlation characteristics of ""local tightness and overall looseness."" The connection between the ""Shanghai-Nanjing-Hangzhou-Suzhou"" sub-network and other nodes was polarized and the first connection nodes mostly appeared in core cities showing the core-edge characteristics of the three-layered. Factors such as economic development industrial structure transportation infrastructure human capital opening up to the outside world and the opening of high-speed railways significantly drove the spatial correlation of tourism ecological resilience and showed obvious belt-like or sheet-like distribution patterns. The impacts of industrial structure transportation infrastructure opening up to the outside world and high-speed rail opening on the spatial correlation of tourism ecological resilience had spatial spillover effects. In addition the impacts of urbanization and marketization on the spatial correlation of tourism ecological resilience had threshold effects showing a nonlinear characteristic of increasing marginal effects."
PUBMED_42765245	PubMed	2026	"Urban Renewal-ecological Resilience Spatial Correlation Network and Spillover Effects in Central Plains Urban Agglomeration . Focusing on 29 prefecture-level cities in the Central Plains Urban Agglomeration CPUA this study employs the entropy-weighted TOPSIS method a modified gravity model social network analysis SNA and spatial panel regression models to systematically examine the spatiotemporal evolution characteristics spatial correlation network structure and spillover effect mechanisms between urban renewal and ecological resilience from 2005 to 2023. The results reveal that The comprehensive urban renewal index exhibited a ""stepwise growth"" trend spatially forming a ""core-secondary-periphery"" structure with Zhengzhou as the core and Luoyang and Nanyang as secondary centers. Cities such as Xingtai and Shangqiu demonstrated notable late-mover advantages while marginal cities in southern Shanxi and western Henan lagged behind. The mean ecological resilience increased from 0.41 to 0.45 yet spatial heterogeneity remained significant. Zhengzhou maintained an absolute lead 0.91 whereas resource-dependent cities like Handan and Pingdingshan showed declining trends due to prolonged resource exploitation. Although Shangqiu improved its resilience through ecological restoration its spillover effects remained limited. The spatial correlation network between urban renewal and ecological resilience transitioned from a single-core polarized pattern to a multi-core networked structure with network density at a relatively low level 0.2-0.3 and an overall ""dense east sparse west"" distribution. Zhengzhou consistently served as the core node exhibiting significantly higher degree centrality and betweenness centrality than those of other cities. The eastern plains formed tight linkages leveraging transportation advantages while the western region displayed an ""isolated island chain"" structure due to topographic constraints. Urban renewal exerted a significant positive local effect on ecological resilience but generated negative spillovers on neighboring areas. Additionally industrial structure optimization positively influenced resilience with spatial spillovers whereas urbanization may impose negative impacts on surrounding regions through ecological space compression. These findings provide theoretical and policy insights for optimizing regional eco-urban collaborative governance and promoting sustainable urban agglomeration development."
PUBMED_42688980	PubMed	2026	"World Health Day 2026-""Together for Health. Stand with Science"": Reinforcing the One Health Paradigm through Community-level Action in India."
PUBMED_42691039	PubMed	2026	'My dog is my life': One Health approaches to healthcare for people and their companion animals experiencing homelessness in the United Kingdom. Around one in ten people seeking shelter from homelessness in the United Kingdom have a companion animal, most commonly a dog. Dog ownership when homeless can pose a barrier to accessing healthcare and accommodation, and may force individuals to sleep on the streets. People experiencing homelessness with a dog are therefore a stigmatised minority within a minority, often invisible to support services and hard to reach. The bond between human and canine in these situations is usually strong; the dog is often the most significant 'other' in that person's life. Failure to accommodate this relationship as part of a holistic approach has implications for both human and animal healthcare in the homeless community. Bringing these two healthcare disciplines together represents a specific application of One Health that can help us better realise their collaborative transdisciplinary potential. Interpretative phenomenological analysis was used to explore health needs and challenges for people experiencing homelessness with companion dogs in the UK and to investigate the feasibility of joint healthcare provision. Study participants included people experiencing homelessness and service providers working in veterinary or human healthcare and housing services. Human and animal health were considered entangled by both service users and service providers, requiring an approach which accounts for the needs of human and animal together. The idea of joint delivery of human and animal healthcare at the same venue was of interest to both service users and providers but also raised concerns. While sparse examples are available in the literature, a more workable concept may be to aim for a 'coordinated multi-species healthcare' which is responsive and empathic to the needs of both people and dogs.
PUBMED_42700958	PubMed	2026	'One Health'-based epidemiological investigation reveals the emergence of carbapenem-resistant Morganella spp. across diverse ecological niches. OBJECTIVES: To investigate the prevalence, genomic relatedness and resistance characteristics of carbapenemase-gene-positive Morganella spp. (CRM) across human, animal, fly and aquatic sources. METHODS: A total of 163 Morganella isolates were collected from humans (n 124), animals (n 5), flies (n 21), aquatic environment (n 13) across 13 provinces or municipalities during 2018-2024. A subset of 71 representative isolates was subjected to antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST), whole-genome sequencing and conjugation experiments. RESULTS: Among 163 isolates, 18 were carbapenemase-gene-positive: 15 carried blaNDM-1 alone, two carried blaKPC-2 alone and one carried both genes. They were recovered from humans, flies and hospital sewage. Five isolates carried blaPER-4; four carbapenemase-negative carriers were resistant to both ceftazidime/avibactam and aztreonam/avibactam. The aac(3)-IV gene was associated with high apramycin MICs and was most frequent in animal- and fly-derived isolates. Phylogenetic analysis showed diverse lineages, with limited low-SNP links between human and urban-river isolates. blaNDM-1 was transferred successfully from 11 of 16 donor isolates. CONCLUSIONS: CRM occur across multiple One Health niches. The findings highlight environmental and non-human reservoirs as potential contributors to their dissemination and identify blaPER-4 and aac(3)-IV as resistance-associated genes requiring further study.
<div></div>    "	1999 - Plague in Malawi 27 July 1999 Disease Outbreak Reported Since 18 June a number of sporadic suspect cases of plague have occurred in Nsanje district, Southern Region. Up to 21 July, 74 suspect cases had been reported from a total of 22 villages. Six villages along the Mozambican border were the most affected reporting around 3 to 4 suspect cases each. Some of the other villages reported only one suspect case each. The treatment of patients is under way as well as environmental control measures which include spraying and dusting of affected and surrounding housing areas, health education on proper storage of foodstuffs and refuse disposal. The situation was being handled effectively by the Ministry of Health but drug supplies have been depleted and more may be needed. WHO has offered its assistance to the national health authorities. The last outbreak of plague in Malawi was in 1997 when a total of 582 cases were reported including cases in Nsanje, Chikwawa and Ntchisi Districts, all in Southern Region.	WHO	1023
<div></div>    "	Poliomyelitis in Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo 30 July 2007 On 25 July 2007, four new cases of polio were confirmed in Equateur province of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, bringing the total number of cases in the country this year to 26. In neighbouring Angola, advance notification of two new polio cases was received, which will bring the total number of cases in Angola in 2007 to 8. The two cases are from Luanda and Benguele provinces. Both countries are continuing synchronized, cross-border outbreak response activities. Large-scale, supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) were launched nationwide in Angola, and in the affected areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Equateur and Bandundu provinces) on 25 July, to reach more than 8 million children under the age of five years. Further immunization campaigns will be conducted later in the year. In 2005, poliovirus of Indian origin re-infected Angola, before subsequently spreading to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2006. For more information Global Polio Eradication Initiative	WHO	1086
<div></div>    "	Avian influenza situation in Egypt 20 March 2006 The Ministry of Health in Egypt has confirmed the country s first case of human infection with the H5N1 avian influenza virus. The case occurred in a 30-year-old woman from the Qaliubiya governorate near Cairo. She developed symptoms in early March following close contact with diseased chickens, ducks, and a turkey in the household flock. She was hospitalized on 16 March and died the following day. Monitoring of the woman s family members and close contacts has found no signs of influenza-like illness. Testing was conducted by the US Naval Medical Research Unit (NAMRU-3), which is based in Cairo. Samples are being sent abroad for diagnostic verification and further analysis by a WHO collaborating laboratory. WHO will adjust the figures in its cumulative number of cases following the results of this external verification. Egypt confirmed its first H5N1 outbreak in poultry on 17 February. The virus has since been reported in 18 of the country s 26 governorates. In Egypt, poultry are often kept in close proximity to households, also in urban areas.	WHO	1110
<div></div>    "	Cholera in Iraq - Update 3 19 June 2003 Disease Outbreak Reported From 28 April to 4 June 2003, a total of 73 laboratory-confirmed cholera cases have been reported in Iraq : 68 in Basra governorate, 4 in Missan governorate, 1 in Muthana governorate. No deaths have been reported. From 17 May to 4 June 2003, the daily surveillance system of diarrhoeal disease cases in the four main hospitals of Basra reported a total of 1549 cases of acute watery diarrhea. Among these cases, 25.6 % occurred in patients aged 5 years and above. The water supply situation is critical. Short-term measures have been undertaken by UNICEF and local authorities to improve accessibility to safe drinking water and to limit the spread of water-borne epidemics. WHO is supporting local authorities in implementing an early warning communicable disease surveillance system, in strengthening laboratory capacity and in coordinating the cholera outbreak response. The surveillance system is being expanded to the whole Lower South (all 4 governorates) and weekly reports from all facilities have begun. UNICEF is also supporting the initiative by providing health education material in Arabic and chlorine tablets to all health directorates.	WHO	1217
<div></div>    "	Human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus update Disease outbreak news 17 December 2013 - On 15 and 16 December 2013, the National Health and Family Planning Commission, China notified WHO of two new laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus. The first patient is a 39-year-old man from Guangdong Province. He became ill on 6 December 2013 and was admitted to hospital on 11 December 2013. He is currently in critical condition. The second patient is a 65-year-old woman from Guangdong Province. She was exposed to live poultry and became ill on 11 December 2013 and was admitted to hospital on 15 December 2013. She is currently in critical condition. So far, there is no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission. The Chinese government continues to take the following surveillance and control measures: strengthen surveillance and situation analysis; reinforce case management and treatment; conduct risk communication with the public and release information; strengthen international collaboration and communication; and conduct scientific studies. WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions.	WHO	1258
<div></div>    "	Enterovirus D68 in the United States of America 17 September 2014 On 10 September 2014, the United States of America informed the Pan American Health Organization/World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO) about an outbreak of severe respiratory illness associated with Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68). As of 16 September 2014, 130 laboratory-confirmed cases of EV-D68 have been reported in 12 US states Alabama, Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Missouri, New York, Oklahoma, and Pennsylvania. Investigations into suspected clusters in many other states are ongoing. EV-D68 is identified using molecular techniques at a limited number of laboratories in the USA. Enterovirus infections, including EV-D68, are not nationally notifiable, but laboratory detections of enterovirus and parechovirus types are reported voluntarily to the National Enterovirus Surveillance System, which is managed by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Currently, there are no available vaccines or specific treatments for EV-D68 and clinical care is supportive. Symptoms of EV-D68 may include fever, runny nose, sneezing, cough, and body and muscle aches. Individuals with pre-existing conditions, such as asthma or other respiratory diseases, may be especially prone to severe infections from EV-D68 and may experience difficulty breathing or have wheezing.	WHO	1369
<div></div>    "	Ebola outbreak in Democratic Republic of Congo update 26 October 2012 - As of 24 October 2012, 52 cases (35 laboratory confirmed, 17 probable) with Ebola haemorrhagic fever (EHF) have been reported in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Of these, 25 have been fatal (12 confirmed, 13 probable). The cases are reported from Isiro and Viadana health zones in Haut-U l district in Province Orientale. The Ministry of Health (MoH) continues to work with local health authorities and international partners in active surveillance, tracing of contacts of probable and confirmed cases, infection prevention and control in health care settings, management of patients in health care facilities, logistics, social mobilization, provision of psychosocial support and conducting anthropological analysis to support the control of the outbreak. Surveillance activities are being strengthened in Isiro and neighbouring areas, including Bedhe and Nakwapongo. In Isiro, health care workers are being trained on basic infection prevention and control in health care settings. Through the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN), a field laboratory has been set up by the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). Social mobilization activities are being carried out in schools and churches in Isiro, Rungu and Ngosaku to provide information on protection against the Ebola virus and to discuss concerns of the local population.	WHO	1423
<div></div>    "	Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) update Disease Outbreak News 15 May 2014 - The following cases of laboratory confirmed Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) have been reported from Jordan, Lebanon, the Netherlands, the United Arab Emirates, and the United States of America. Netherlands On 14 May 2014, the National IHR Focal Point for the Netherlands notified WHO of the first laboratory confirmed case of MERS-CoV infection in the Netherlands. The patient is a 70 year-old male citizen of the Netherlands, with travel history to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia between 26 April 2014 and 10 May 2014. The patient developed first symptoms on 1 May 2014 while in Medina, Saudi Arabia. He was evaluated at an emergency care department in Mecca on 6 May and given antibiotics; he did not have respiratory symptoms while in Saudi Arabia. On return to the Netherlands, on 10 May, his condition deteriorated, including development of respiratory symptoms, and he was hospitalized on the same day. On 13 May, he tested positive for MERS-CoV. Currently, the patient is in the ICU in a stable condition. The patient reports no contact with animals or consumption of raw animal products. Identification of close contacts, including flight contacts has been initiated. United States of America On 12 May 2014, the United States IHR National Focal Point reported the second laboratory confirmed MERS-CoV infection in the United States in a male health-care worker in his 40s, who lives and works in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. He travelled to the United States from Jeddah on 1 May 2014 on commercial flights via London Heathrow with travel from London to Boston, Massachusetts; from Boston to Atlanta, Georgia; and from Atlanta to Orlando, Florida. He began feeling unwell on 1 May 2014 on the flight from Jeddah to London with a low-grade fever, chills, and a slight cough. On 9 May 2014, he was seen in an emergency room and hospitalized. The patient is in a stable condition. The Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ) from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) continues to work with local, state, and international partners, as well as with the airlines to obtain the passenger manifests from the flights to help identify, locate, and interview contacts. United Arab Emirates On 11 May 2014, the National IHR Focal Point of the United Arab Emirates reported nine additional MERS-CoV cases residing in Abu Dhabi. Two are UAE nationals, one is an Omani national, and six are of different nationalities but residing in Abu Dhabi. A 51-year old male Omani national, residing in Al Buraimi, Oman, developed fever on 18 April 2014. He was admitted to the hospital on 20 April 2014. On 23 April 2014 he tested positive for MERS-CoV. He is currently in hospital in isolation in a stable condition. The patient has comorbidities, no history of travel, no contact with animals, and no history of contact with a laboratory confirmed case of MERS-CoV. The IHR NFP for Oman was already informed about this case. A 39-year-old female health-care worker, residing in Abu Dhabi, who was screened as part of contact investigation. She was asymptomatic; MERS-CoV was confirmed by the laboratory on the 25 April 2014. She has a history of exposure to a confirmed case of MERS-CoV notified to WHO on 18 April 2014. She has no comorbidities, no history of travel, and no contact with animals. A 30-year old male UAE national, residing in Abu Dhabi. On 24 April 2014, he went to the emergency room with cough and shortness of breath, but he was clinically stable, and was treated as an outpatient. On 25 April, he tested positive for MERS-CoV. He is currently in hospital in a good general condition. The patient had reported comorbidities, no history of recent travel, no history of animal contact, and no history of contact with a laboratory confirmed case of MERS-CoV. A 42-years old male UAE national, residing in Abu Dhabi, who was asymptomatic and was screened as a contact of the first case in this notification. On 25 April 2014, he tested positive for MERS-CoV. He has no history of travel and no history of contact with animals. A 30-year old female health-care worker residing in Abu Dhabi. She had a sore throat on 15 April 2014; a sputum sample was taken on 16 April 2014 as part of a general screening of health-care workers following a cluster of cases in the hospital. She tested positive for MERS-CoV on the 17 April 2014 and was admitted to hospital the same day. She was discharged on the 22 April 2014. She has no comorbidity, no significant travel history, and no contact with animals. A 44-year old male health-care worker residing in Abu Dhabi. He had a mild sore throat that started on the 19 April 2014. He had contact on 13 April at a social gathering with a confirmed case reported to WHO on 17 April 2014. The patient tested positive for MERS-CoV on 21 April 2014 and was admitted to hospital on 22 April 2014. He was discharged on 1 May 2014. He has no comorbidities, no significant travel history, and no contact with animals. A 41-year old male hospital employee residing in Abu Dhabi. He was asymptomatic, but was screened without having contact with any case as part of a general screening at his work place. On 21 April, he tested positive for MERS-CoV and was admitted to hospital on 22 April. He was discharged on 27 April 2014. He has no comorbidities, no significant travel history, and no contact with animals A 68-year old male hospital employee residing in Abu Dhabi. He was asymptomatic, but was screened without having contact with any case as part of a general screening at his work place. On 23 April, he tested positive for MERS-CoV and was admitted to hospital on 24 April 2014 for isolation. He was discharged on 30 April 2014. He has reported comorbidities, has no significant travel history, and no contact with animals. A 45-year old male hospital employee residing in Abu Dhabi. He was asymptomatic, but was screened without having contact with any case as part of a general screening at his work place. On 26 April, he tested positive for MERS-CoV and was admitted to hospital on the same day for isolation. He was discharged on 1 May 2014. He has no comorbidities, no significant travel history, and no contact with animals. On 8 May 2014, the National IHR Focal Point for the United Arab Emirates (UAE) reported an additional four laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV. A 37 year-old male expatriate construction worker in Abu Dhabi who became ill on 23 April 2014 and was hospitalized on 29 April 2014. He tested positive for MERS-CoV on 1 May 2014 and is currently in the intensive care unit (ICU) in a critical but stable condition. He is reported to have no comorbidities, no history of travel, and no contact with laboratory confirmed cases or with animals. A 38 year-old female administrative officer in a health clinic from Abu Dhabi who became ill on 20 April 2014. She was admitted to hospital on 26 April 2014. Initial laboratory tests for MERS-CoV were negative for the virus, but a follow-up test on 27 April 2014 returned positive on 1 May 2014. Currently, the patient is in the ICU in a critical but stable situation. She has several comorbidities, but is also to have no history of travel, no contact with laboratory confirmed cases or with animals, and no history of raw camel milk consumption. A 61 year-old male expatriate tailor shop owner residing in Abu Dhabi. He has been hospitalized since 18 March 2014 as a case of atrial fibrillation and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Samples collected on 29 April 2014 and sent to the laboratory tested positive for MERS-CoV on 1 May 2014. Currently, he is in the ICU in a critical but stable condition. He is reported have no history of travel, no contact with laboratory confirmed cases or with animals, and no history of raw camel milk consumption. A 34 year-old female expatriate residing in Abu Dhabi. She is asymptomatic. She was detected through mass screening of her work place without being in contact with any known case. Samples collected on 29 April 2014 and sent to the laboratory tested positive for MERS-CoV on 1 May 2014. She is reported to have no comorbidities, no history of travel, and no contact with laboratory confirmed cases or with animals. She is a vegetarian and consumes only pasteurized dairy products. One additional case not previously reported was provided to WHO on 8 April 2014 by the National IHR Focal Point for UAE: A 59 year-old male farm employee residing in Abu Dhabi. The patient had onset of symptoms on 28 March 2014 with febrile illness. On 30 March 2014, he was admitted to hospital and was being treated in the ICU. On 3 April 2014, he was laboratory confirmed with MERS-CoV. He is reported to have had contact with an admitted laboratory confirmed case of MERS-CoV. Public health authorities continued to carry out contact tracing and an epidemiological investigation. Further developments will be communicated when available. Jordan On 11 May 2014, the National IHR Focal Point for Jordan reported to WHO an additional case of MERS-CoV. The case is a 50 year-old male health-care worker, Jordanian citizen, and resident of Zarka Governorate. He presented with symptoms on 7 May 2014. On 10 May his condition worsened and he was diagnosed with pneumonia after performing a chest X-ray. He was admitted to hospital the same day and tested positive for MERS-CoV. The patient has a history of contact with two MERS-confirmed cases. He is in a stable condition. He is reported to have no history of travel and no history of contact with animals. Tracing and screening of six family members and 24 health-care workers for MERS-CoV is currently ongoing. Lebanon On 8 May, 2014, the National IHR Focal Point (NFP) of Lebanon reported the first laboratory-confirmed case of MERS-CoV infection. On 22 April 2014, a 60 year-old male health-care worker and national of Lebanon complained of high-grade fever. On 27 April 2014, he was diagnosed with pneumonia and was admitted to the hospital on 30 April 2014. His symptoms included fever, dyspnoea, and productive cough. On 2 May 2014, he tested positive for MERS-CoV. He is reported to have comorbidities. He was in a stable condition in hospital and was released on 7 May 2014. The patient is reported to have no contact with laboratory confirmed cases or with animals and no history of raw camel milk consumption. No history of travel was reported in the 14 days prior to onset of symptoms. The patient is known to travel throughout the Gulf region, particularly to Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and UAE; investigations into the patient s travel history are ongoing. His most recent travel was five weeks prior to symptom onset to UAE and eight weeks prior to symptom onset to Jeddah where he visited one of the hospitals that had been facing an upsurge of MERS-CoV cases. Globally, 572 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV have officially been reported to WHO, including 173 deaths. The global total includes all of the cases reported in this update (18), plus 58 laboratory confirmed cases officially reported to WHO from Saudi Arabia between 5 and 9 May. WHO is working with Saudi Arabia for additional information on these cases and will provide further updates as soon as possible. WHO advice Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns. Infection prevention and control measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. Health-care facilities that provide for patients suspected or confirmed to be infected with MERS-CoV infection should take appropriate measures to decrease the risk of transmission of the virus from an infected patient to other patients, health-care workers and visitors. Health care workers should be educated, trained and refreshed with skills on infection prevention and control. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV early because some have mild or unusual symptoms. For this reason, it is important that health-care workers apply standard precautions consistently with all patients regardless of their diagnosis in all work practices all the time. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to all patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection. Contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection. Airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures. Patients should be managed as potentially infected when the clinical and epidemiological clues strongly suggest MERS-CoV, even if an initial test on a nasopharyngeal swab is negative. Repeat testing should be done when the initial testing is negative, preferably on specimens from the lower respiratory tract. Health-care providers are advised to maintain vigilance. Recent travellers returning from the Middle East who develop SARI should be tested for MERS-CoV as advised in the current surveillance recommendations. All Member States are reminded to promptly assess and notify WHO of any new case of infection with MERS-CoV, along with information about potential exposures that may have resulted in infection and a description of the clinical course. Investigation into the source of exposure should promptly be initiated to identify the mode of exposure, so that further transmission of the virus can be prevented. People at high risk of severe disease due to MERS-CoV should avoid close contact with animals when visiting farms or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. For the general public, when visiting a farm or a barn, general hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals, avoiding contact with sick animals, and following food hygiene practices, should be adhered to. WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions.	WHO	14260
<div></div>    "	Avian influenza situation in China update 51 30 December 2005 The Ministry of Health of China has confirmed an additional case of human infection on the mainland with the H5N1 avian influenza virus. The case is a 41-year-old woman from the south-eastern province of Fujian. She developed symptoms of fever followed by pneumonia on 6 December, and was admitted to hospital two days later. The patient died on 21 December. On 13 December, initial laboratory tests on samples from the patient tested negative for H5N1. But further tests on 23 December including PCR tests carried out at the Chinese Center for Disease Control in Beijing showed positive results. The virus was also isolated from the patient. Close contacts who have been placed under medical observation have not displayed any symptoms, health authorities report. Agricultural authorities so far have not been able to confirm the presence of the H5 virus subtype in poultry in the vicinity of the patient s residence or place of work. Investigators have not been able to confirm any direct contact between the patient and poultry prior to the onset of illness. The investigation, however, is continuing and answers to these and other questions are still being sought. This is China s seventh laboratory-confirmed human case. Of these cases, three have been fatal (including this latest case). To date, China has reported human cases in six provinces and regions: Hunan, Anhui, Guangxi, Liaoning, Jiangxi and Fujian.	WHO	1478
<div></div>    "	Update 65 - Situation in Toronto 24 May 2003 Situation in Toronto Health authorities in Canada have today informed WHO that two clusters of cases of respiratory illness are undergoing investigation for respiratory illness, including pneumonia. One cluster of 5 cases is associated with St John s Rehabilitation Hospital in Toronto. The second cluster of 26 cases, including 10 health care workers, is associated with North York General Hospital. One patient undergoing investigation has been linked to both hospitals. As a precaution, both clusters are being managed as possibly representing cases of SARS until proven otherwise. Results of laboratory, clinical and epidemiological investigations are expected early next week. The status of Toronto, which was removed last week from the WHO list of areas with recent local transmission, remains unchanged pending further information made available as the investigations progress. Update on cases and countries As of today, a cumulative total of 8141 probable cases with 696 deaths have been reported from 28 countries. This represents an increase of 89 new cases and 7 deaths when compared with yesterday. The new deaths occurred in China (5) and Hong Kong SAR (2). All of the new cases were reported from two outbreak sites, Taiwan and China. Taiwan has today reported 55 new cases, bringing the cumulative total to 538 cases and 60 deaths. China reported 34 new cases, bringing the cumulative total to 5309 cases and 308 deaths.	WHO	1480
<div></div>    "	2001 - Meningococcal disease in the African Meningitis Belt 20 February 2001 Disease Outbreak Reported The highest number of cases and the highest burden of this disease occur in sub-Saharan Africa in an area that is referred to as the meningitis belt. This is the area between Senegal and Ethiopia and includes all or part of at least 15 countries, with an estimated total population of approximately 300 million. Epidemics occur in seasonal cycles between the end of November and the end of June, depending on the location and climate of the country and declines rapidly with the arrival of the rainy season. WHO has reported a total number of 603 cases, including 45 deaths (case-fatality rate of 7.5%) in 4 d partements in the north of Benin: Alibori, Borgou, Atacora and Donga, since January 2001. Neisseria meningitidis serogroup A has been confirmed. The Ministry of Health has initiated a mass vaccination campaign in these d partements. From 25 December 2000 to 15 February 2001, a total of 798 cases and 83 deaths (case-fatality rate of 10.4%) has been reported by WHO in 2 pr fectures in southwestern Chad : Moyen-Chari and Longone Occidental. Neisseria meningitidis serogroup A has been confirmed. A mass vaccination campaign is underway. As of 30 January 2001, WHO has reported an outbreak of meningocccal disease in Ethiopia in 5 regions: Amhara, Gambella, Somali, Tigray and Southern regions, with a total of 485 cases and 61 deaths. Neisseria meningitidis serogroup A has been confirmed. The Ministry of Health has reinforced surveillance and is carrying out vaccinations in the affected areas. The media is also providing health education messages.	WHO	1665
<div></div>    "	China confirms SARS infection in two previously reported cases update 4 29 April 2004 The Chinese Ministry of Health has today reported diagnostic confirmation of SARS infection in two patients previously under investigation in Beijing. Confirmation is based on the results of laboratory tests, clinical symptoms, and a history of close contact with a known case. Both patients are relatives the mother and an aunt of a 20-year-old nurse who treated what is thought to be the index case in the outbreak. The nurse subsequently developed respiratory symptoms and was hospitalized on 7 April. She was visited the next day by family members, including the mother and aunt. The 44-year-old mother is now in critical condition. The 36-year-old aunt, who was diagnosed with bilateral pneumonia earlier this week, remains in stable condition. Both patients are part of a third generation of cases that includes the nurse s father and two other patients hospitalized on the same ward, including one patient who shared a room with the nurse. The number of SARS cases either clinically confirmed or under investigation remains nine: seven in Beijing and two (including the single fatality) in Anhui Province. In Beijing, all seven SARS cases are now being treated in isolation at Ditan Hospital. This is a risk reduction strategy aimed at preventing further spread through the hospital system. According to WHO guidelines for the global surveillance of SARS, classification as a confirmed case at the start of an outbreak requires independent verification of results by an external international reference laboratory. Such procedures are considered necessary in view of the implications that confirmed SARS cases can have for international public health.	WHO	1744
<div></div>    "	Polio in the Syrian Arab Republic - update Disease outbreak news 26 November 2013 - A total of 17 cases due to wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) have been confirmed in the Syrian Arab Republic. In addition to 15 cases confirmed in Deir Al Zour province, two additional cases have been confirmed, one each in rural Damascus and Aleppo, confirming widespread circulation of the virus. The case with most recent onset developed paralysis on 8 October 2013. A comprehensive outbreak response continues to be implemented across the region. Seven countries and territories are holding mass polio vaccination campaigns targeting 22 million children under the age of five years. In a joint resolution, all countries of the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region have declared polio eradication to be an emergency, calling for support in negotiating and establishing access to those children who are currently unreached with polio vaccination. WHO and UNICEF are committed to work with all organizations and agencies providing humanitarian assistance to Syrians affected by the conflict to ensure all Syrian children are vaccinated no matter where they live. It is anticipated that outbreak response will need to continue for at least six to eight months, depending on the area and based on evolving epidemiology. Given the current situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, frequent population movements across the region and subnational immunity gaps in key areas, the risk of further spread of wild poliovirus across the region is considered to be high. A surveillance alert has been issued for the region to actively search for additional potential cases in addition to implementing the recommended supplementary immunization activities with oral polio vaccine. WHO s International Travel and Health recommendations for travelers to and from polio-affected areas pdf, 10.54Mb	WHO	1856
PUBMED_42747181	 and waste management to reduce and prevent the emergence of antibiotic resistant strains."	 agriculture	2026
<div></div>    "	Polio in Congo 4 November 2010 - An acute outbreak of poliomyelitis is occurring in the Republic of Congo, with 120 cases of acute flaccid paralysis and 58 deaths. Half the cases have been reported in the past ten days, with the first case occurring in early October. Two cases have been confirmed to have been caused by wild poliovirus type 1 and laboratory testing continues. Most cases are in young adults: among those cases for which age data is available (43) at this time, 33 are between the ages of 15-25 years. Only one is under five years old, three are between 7 and 13 and five are between 26 and 58. The outbreak is due to imported poliovirus. Congo had recorded its last case of indigenous polio in 2000. Investigations are ongoing to determine definitively the origins of the virus. Nearly all cases have been reported from the port city of Pointe Noire, with cases also reported from Dolisie (2), Kayes, Bouenza, Brazzaville, and Mvouiti (one each). The Government of Congo has alerted the public to the outbreak and launched an emergency response plan, with support from key partners, including WHO, UNICEF and the US CDC. At least three nationwide vaccination campaigns are expected, using monovalent oral polio vaccine and targeting the entire population. The number, geographic extent and target age groups of further campaigns will be determined by the Government based on the evolving epidemiology. It is anticipated that a multi-country campaign will be required to cover bordering at-risk areas. New cases continue to be reported every day. It is important that countries across central Africa and the Horn of Africa strengthen AFP surveillance, in order to rapidly detect any poliovirus importations and facilitate a rapid response. Countries should also strengthen population immunity levels to minimise the consequences of any virus introduction. As per recommendations outlined in WHO's International Travel and Health, guidance travellers to and from Angola and DR Congo should be fully protected by vaccination. Given the recent progress achieved in Nigeria (98% reduction in cases this year compared to the same period in 2009), very high priority is being given to rapidly controlling persistent transmission such as in Angola and stopping new outbreaks such as Congo. For more information Global Polio Eradication Initiative	WHO	2356
<div></div>    "	Ebola virus disease update - Senegal 30 August 2014 Epidemiology and surveillance On 30 August 2014, Senegal s Ministry of Public Health and Social Affairs provided WHO with details about a case of Ebola virus disease (EVD) announced in that country on 29 August. WHO has also received details of the emergency investigation immediately launched by the Government. Testing and confirmation of Ebola were undertaken by a laboratory at the Institut Pasteur in Dakar. The case is a 21-year-old male native of Guinea, who arrived in Dakar, by road, on 20 August and stayed with relatives at a home in the outskirts of the city. On 23 August, he sought medical care for symptoms that included fever, diarrhoea, and vomiting. He received treatment for malaria, but did not improve and left the facility. After leaving the facility, he continued to reside with his relatives. Though the investigation is in its early stages, he is not presently known to have travelled elsewhere. On 26 August, he was referred to a specialized facility for infectious diseases, still showing the same symptoms, and was hospitalized. On 27 August, authorities in Conakry, Guinea, issued an alert, informing medical services in Guinea and neighbouring countries, that a person, who was a close contact of a confirmed EVD patient, had escaped the surveillance system. That alert prompted testing at the Dakar laboratory, launched an investigation, and triggered urgent contact tracing. Health sector response WHO is treating this first case in Senegal as a top priority emergency. Key operational personnel were dispatched to Dakar today; others will follow. The Government of Senegal has informed WHO of the urgent need for epidemiological support, personal protective equipment, and hygiene kits. These needs will be met with the fastest possible speed. WHO continues to monitor for reports of rumoured or suspected cases from countries around the world and systematic verification of these cases is ongoing. Countries are encouraged to continue engaging in active surveillance and preparedness activities. WHO does not recommend any travel or trade restrictions be applied except in cases where individuals have been confirmed or are suspected of being infected with EVD or where individuals have had contact with cases of EVD. (Contacts do not include properly-protected health-care workers and laboratory staff.) Temporary recommendations from the Emergency Committee with regard to actions to be taken by countries can be found at: IHR Emergency Committee on Ebola outbreak in west Africa	WHO	2567
<div></div>    "	Poliovirus detected from environmental samples in Israel 3 June 2013 - In Israel, wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) was isolated from sewage samples collected on 9 April 2013 in Rahat, southern Israel. The virus has been detected in sewage only; no case of paralytic polio has been reported. Genetic sequencing and epidemiological investigations are ongoing to determine its origin. Preliminary analyses indicate the strain is not related to the virus currently affecting the Horn of Africa. The virus isolate was detected through routine environmental surveillance in Israel that involves regular testing of sewage water. Israel has been free of indigenous WPV transmission since 1988. In the past, wild poliovirus has been detected in environmental samples collected in this region between 1991 and 2002 without occurrence of cases of paralytic polio in the area. Following detection of the wild poliovirus, health authorities in Israel are conducting a full epidemiological and public health investigation, actively searching for potential cases of paralytic polio as well as for any un-immunized persons. Routine immunization levels are estimated at 94 percent. Outcomes of the investigation will determine the need for any additional catch-up immunization activities, as necessary. Similar activities are being implemented by health authorities in Gaza and the West Bank. Specimens collected through environmental surveillance since 2002 in both Gaza and the West Bank have consistently tested negative for the presence of WPV. Given that there are high levels of population immunity levels in the area, and the investigations and response being implemented, the World Health Organization (WHO) assesses the risk of further international spread of this virus strain from Israel as low to moderate. It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio affected countries, strengthen surveillance for cases of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), in order to rapidly detect any new poliovirus importations and facilitate a rapid response. Countries should also analyze routine immunization coverage data to identify any subnational gaps in population immunity to guide catch-up immunization activities and thereby minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction. Priority should be given to areas at high-risk of importations and where OPV3/DPT3 vaccine coverage is less than 80 percent. WHO s International Travel and Health recommends that all travellers to and from polio affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Three countries remain endemic for indigenous transmission of WPV: Nigeria, Pakistan and Afghanistan. Additionally, in 2013, the Horn of Africa is affected by an outbreak of WPV, with six cases confirmed in Kenya and Somalia.	WHO	2799
<div></div>    "	End of Ebola outbreak in Uganda 4 October 2012 - The Ministry of Health (MoH), Uganda has declared today, the end of the Ebola haemorrhagic fever (EHF) outbreak in Kibaale district. The last case was confirmed on 3 August 2012 and was discharged from the hospital on 24 August 2012. This is double the maximum incubation period (21 days) for Ebola as recommended by WHO. In the outbreak, a total of 24 probable and confirmed cases were recorded, of which 11 were laboratory confirmed by the Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) in Entebbe. A total of 17 deaths were reported in this outbreak. National and District Ebola Task Forces were coordinated by the MoH to respond to the outbreak. MoH worked closely with WHO and other agencies which included the African Field Epidemiology Network (AFENET), EMESCO Foundation (a local NGO), Infectious Diseases Institute (IDI), Uganda Red Cross Society (URCS), M decins Sans Fronti res (MSF), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), US Centers for Disease Control and prevention (CDC), US Agency for International Development (USAID). WHO also coordinated with the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) to support the response operations. The response activities carried out during the outbreak included enhanced surveillance for early case detection and contact tracing, reinforcement of infection prevention and control including case management in isolation facilities using barrier nursing and conducting supervised safe burials, reinforcement of standard precautions in health care settings and enhancing communication interventions at the national and community levels. A team led by CDC conducted ecological studies in Kibaale district to try and understand the likely source and route of transmission of the virus. Samples from bats, primates and livestock were collected to study the possible source of the Ebola virus and putative initial human infection from wildlife. The Ebola response teams have continued to educate the community on prevention, detection of and early reporting of any suspected cases in future. Health workers in the district have been trained on prevention of health care associated infections. WHO does not recommend that any travel or trade restrictions be applied to the Uganda with respect to this event. General information on Ebola subtypes There are five identified subtypes of Ebola virus. The subtypes have been named after the location where they were been first detected in EHF outbreaks. Three subtypes of the five have been associated with large EHF outbreaks in Africa. Ebola-Zaire, Ebola-Sudan and Ebola-Bundibugyo. EHF is a febrile haemorrhagic illness which causes death in 25-90% of all cases. The Ebola Reston species, found in the Philippines, can infect humans, but no illness or death in humans has been reported to date.	WHO	2838
<div></div>    "	2000 - Meningococcal disease in Francen(Update), United Kingdom (Update), Oman, Saudi ARabia, Netherlands 21 April 2000 Disease Outbreak Reported There have been a number of cases of meningococcal disease which are associated with returnees from the Haj and their close contacts. France- Update. The number of cases of meningococcal disease associated with pilgrims who have travelled for the Haj has increased, and the total number of cases to date is 14, including 4 deaths. Eleven of the confirmed cases were of meningococcal serogroup W135. United Kingdom- Update. The number of cases of meningococcal disease linked to pilgrims has increased, and is now 22 with 4 deaths. Twenty of the confirmed cases are of meningococcal serogroup W135 and 1 of N. meningitidis serogroup A. The onset of the last case of meningococcal disease reported to date (in a contact) was on 11 April. Oman. There have been 12 cases to date, all have recovered. Of these, 3 were pilgrims (2 males aged 40 and 55 years and 1 female aged 60 years) returning from the Haj, and 9 cases were close contacts of those returned from the Haj. The ages of these patients ranged from 6 months to 80 years. The date of onset of the first case was 20 March, and the most recent case was reported on 6 April. Seven of the confirmed cases are of meningococcal serogroup W135 and 2 of Neisseria meningitidis serogroup A. Saudi Arabia. A total of 199 cases with 55 deaths has been reported since the Haj last month. Bacteriological investigations have revealed N. meningitidis serogroup A in 55 cases, serogroup W135 in 30 and serogroup B in 1 case. A record number of pilgrims (around 1.3 million) travelled to Saudi Arabia for the Haj this year, with an increase in the number from South-East Asia. The health authorities are monitoring the situation closely. Case management and contact tracing are taking place. Netherlands. There have been 2 confirmed cases and 1 probable case of meningococcal disease in close contacts of pilgrims returning from the Haj. The dates of onset in the confirmed cases were 5 and 6 April. Serogroup W135 Neisseiria meningitidis has been isolated from both. Meningococcal disease. As with all types of meningococcal disease, early diagnosis and treatment are essential. The symptoms of group W135 meningococcal disease are the same as for other groups of the disease: sudden onset of intense headache, high fever, nausea, and vomiting, photophobia and stiff neck. The most severe clinical form of the disease, meningococcal septicaemia can be presented by abrupt onset, high fever, petechial rash or purpura. WHO recommends that chemoprophylaxis be given to close contacts of the cases, such as persons sleeping in the same dwelling. In most countries rifampicin is recommended. Immunization against meningococcal disease A+C has been an entry requirement by Saudi Arabia for pilgrims travelling to the Haj. However, the meningococcal A+C vaccine does not protect against group W135 infection. WHO encourages national reference laboratories to closely monitor meningococcal disease.	WHO	3079
<div></div>    "	Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) - update 23 June 2013 - The Ministry of Health (MoH) in Saudi Arabia has announced two additional laboratory-confirmed cases and a death in a previously confirmed case of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). One case is a 41 year-old female from Riyadh who had contact with a confirmed case. The other case is a 32 year-old male from the Eastern Region with underlying medical conditions who is in critical condition. In addition, the MoH has announced the death of a previously reported confirmed case from the Eastern Region who had been admitted to hospital on 26 April 2013. Globally, from September 2012 to date, WHO has been informed of a total of 70 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV, including 39 deaths. WHO has received reports of laboratory-confirmed cases originating in the following countries in the Middle East to date: Jordan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). France, Germany, Italy, Tunisia and the United Kingdom also reported laboratory-confirmed cases; they were either transferred there for care of the disease or returned from the Middle East and subsequently became ill. In France, Italy, Tunisia and the United Kingdom, there has been limited local transmission among patients who had not been to the Middle East but had been in close contact with the laboratory-confirmed or probable cases. Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns. Health care providers are advised to maintain vigilance. Recent travellers returning from the Middle East who develop SARI should be tested for MERS-CoV as advised in the current surveillance recommendations. Specimens from patients lower respiratory tracts should be obtained for diagnosis where possible. Clinicians are reminded that MERS-CoV infection should be considered even with atypical signs and symptoms, such as diarrhoea, in patients who are immunocompromised. Health care facilities are reminded of the importance of systematic implementation of infection prevention and control (IPC). Health care facilities that provide care for patients suspected or confirmed with MERS-CoV infection should take appropriate measures to decrease the risk of transmission of the virus to other patients, health care workers and visitors. All Member States are reminded to promptly assess and notify WHO of any new case of infection with MERS-CoV, along with information about potential exposures that may have resulted in infection and a description of the clinical course. Investigation into the source of exposure should promptly be initiated to identify the mode of exposure, so that further transmission of the virus can be prevented. WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions. WHO continues to closely monitor the situation.	WHO	3103
<div></div>    "	Human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus update Disease outbreak news 7 March 2014 - On 4 March 2014, the Centre for Health Protection (CHP) of the Department of Health, Hong Kong SAR, China, notified WHO of an additional laboratory-confirmed case of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus. The patient is an 18 month-old girl who developed mild fever. She consulted a doctor on 28 February, was admitted to a hospital on 1 March and was discharged from the hospital on 3 March in stable condition. Following laboratory-confirmation with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus infection on 4 March, the patient was admitted to another hospital. She is currently asymptomatic, with no fever. Initial epidemiological investigation revealed that the patient travelled to Foshan, Guangdong province from 5-27 February, where she visited a wet market with her mother. Further investigations into her travel and exposure history are ongoing, including tracing of all close contacts. Sporadic human cases The overall risk assessment has not changed (see WHO Risk Assessment under 'Related links'). The previous report of avian influenza A(H7N9) virus detection in live poultry exported from mainland China to Hong Kong SAR shows the potential for the virus to spread through movement of live poultry, at this time there is no indication that international spread of avian influenza A(H7N9) has occurred. However as the virus infection does not cause signs of disease in poultry, continued surveillance is needed. Further sporadic human cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) infection are expected in affected and possibly neighbouring areas. Should human cases from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during or after arrival. If this were to occur, community level spread is unlikely as the virus does not have the ability to transmit easily among humans. Until the virus adapts itself for efficient human-to-human transmission, the risk of ongoing international spread of H7N9 virus by travellers is low. WHO advice WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid poultry farms, or contact with animals in live bird markets, or entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travellers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices. WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions. As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling or soon after returning from an area where avian influenza is a concern. WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns, in order to ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR (2005), and continue national health preparedness actions.	WHO	3225
<div></div>    "	1997 - Ebola haemorrhagic fever in Gabon (new outbreak) - Update 12 09 January 1997 Disease Outbreak Reported The latest report from Gabon informs that a total of 58 cases with 43 deaths had occurred in the outbreak up to 8 January. The last fatal case occurred on 8 January. One patient is still hospitalized and 14 have recovered.	WHO	332
<div></div>    "	Influenza A(H1N1) - update 55 Laboratory-confirmed cases of new influenza A(H1N1) as officially reported to WHO by States Parties to the International Health Regulations (2005) 29 June 2009 09:00 GMT The breakdown of the number of laboratory-confirmed cases is given in the following table and map. Map of the spread of Influenza A(H1N1): number of laboratory confirmed cases and deaths png, 171kb Country, territory and area Cumulative total Newly confirmed since the last reporting period Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Algeria 2 0 0 0 Antigua and Barbuda 2 0 0 0 Argentina 1488 23 97 2 Australia 4038 7 758 4 Austria 12 0 0 0 Bahamas 4 0 0 0 Bahrain 15 0 0 0 Bangladesh 1 0 0 0 Barbados 10 0 0 0 Belgium 43 0 7 0 Bermuda, UKOT 1 0 0 0 Bolivia 126 0 79 0 Brazil 452 0 53 0 British Virgin Islands, UKOT 1 0 0 0 Brunei Darussalam 29 0 18 0 Bulgaria 7 0 0 0 Cambodia 6 0 1 0 Canada 7775 21 1043 2 Cap Verde 3 0 0 0 Cayman Islands, UKOT 9 0 0 0 Chile 5186 7 0 0 China 1442 0 353 0 Colombia 88 2 16 0 Costa Rica 255 1 33 0 Cote d'Ivoire 2 0 0 0 Cuba 34 0 0 0 Cyprus 25 0 16 0 Czech Republic 9 0 0 0 Denmark 44 0 3 0 Dominica 1 0 0 0 Dominican Republic 108 2 0 0 Ecuador 125 0 0 0 Egypt 50 0 7 0 El Salvador 226 0 66 0 Estonia 13 0 5 0 Ethiopia 2 0 0 0 Fiji 2 0 0 0 Finland 26 0 0 0 France 235 0 44 0 French Polynesia, FOC 3 0 2 0 Martinique, FOC 2 0 0 0 Germany 366 0 33 0 Greece 86 0 13 0 Guatemala 254 2 0 0 Honduras 118 1 0 0 Hungary 8 0 0 0 Iceland 4 0 0 0 India 64 0 0 0 Indonesia 8 0 6 0 Iran 1 0 0 0 Iraq 10 0 10 0 Ireland 39 0 10 0 Israel 469 0 64 0 Italy 112 0 10 0 Jamaica 21 0 2 0 Japan 1212 0 163 0 Jordan 18 0 3 0 Korea, Republic of 202 0 60 0 Kuwait 30 0 0 0 Laos 3 0 0 0 Latvia 1 0 0 0 Lebanon 25 0 0 0 Lithuania 1 0 1 0 Luxembourg 4 0 1 0 Malaysia 112 0 44 0 Mexico 8279 116 0 0 Monaco 1 0 1 0 Montenegro 1 0 0 0 Morocco 11 0 0 0 Nepal 3 0 3 0 Netherlands 118 0 2 0 Netherlands Antilles, Cura ao 3 0 0 0 Netherlands Antilles, Sint Maarten 1 0 0 0 New Zealand 587 0 134 0 Nicaragua 277 0 12 0 Norway 31 0 9 0 Oman 3 0 0 0 Panama 403 0 45 0 Papua New Guinea 1 0 0 0 Paraguay 85 0 6 0 Peru 360 0 108 0 Philippines 861 1 416 0 Poland 14 0 1 0 Portugal 11 0 4 0 Qatar 10 0 0 0 Romania 24 0 5 0 Russia 3 0 0 0 Samoa 1 0 0 0 Saudi Arabia 69 0 21 0 Serbia 5 0 3 0 Singapore 599 0 284 0 Slovakia 9 0 2 0 Slovenia 4 0 1 0 South Africa 1 0 0 0 Spain 541 0 0 0 Sri Lanka 9 0 2 0 Suriname 11 0 0 0 Sweden 67 0 6 0 Switzerland 49 0 2 0 Thailand 774 0 0 0 Trinidad and Tobago 53 0 28 0 Tunisia 2 0 0 0 Turkey 27 0 1 0 Ukraine 1 0 0 0 United Arab Emirates 8 0 1 0 United Kingdom 4250 1 653 0 Guernsey, Crown Dependency 1 0 0 0 Isle of Man, Crown Dependency 1 0 0 0 Jersey, Crown Dependency 8 0 0 0 United States of America 27717 127 6268 40 Uruguay 195 0 0 0 Vanuatu 2 0 0 0 Venezuela 172 0 19 0 Viet Nam 84 0 21 0 West Bank and Gaza Strip 9 0 0 0 Yemen 6 0 0 0 Grand Total 70893 311 11079 48 Chinese Taipei has reported 61 confirmed cases of influenza A (H1N1) with 0 deaths. Cases from Chinese Taipei are included in the cumulative totals provided in the table above. Cumulative and new figures are subject to revision Abbreviations UKOT: United Kingdom Overseas Territory FOC: French Overseas Collectivity OT: Overseas Territory Netherlands Antilles, Cura ao : 3 confirmed cases: The three confirmed cases are crew members of a cruise ship. They did not leave the boat during their illness nor during the 24 hours preceding the onset of symptoms.	WHO	3441
<div></div>    "	Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) Multi-country outbreak Update 37 WHO extends its SARS-related travel advice to Beijing and Shanxi Province in China and to Toronto Canada 23 April 2003 Disease Outbreak Reported As a result of ongoing assessments as to the nature of outbreaks of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Beijing and Shanxi Province, China, and in Toronto, Canada, WHO is now recommending, as a measure of precaution, that persons planning to travel to these destinations consider postponing all but essential travel. This temporary advice, which is an extension of travel advice previously issued for Guangdong Province and Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China will be reassessed in three weeks time. Following global alerts about cases of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), issued by WHO on 12 and 15 March, national authorities have heightened surveillance for suspect and probable cases. In many countries, prompt detection and isolation of initial cases have prevented further transmission altogether or held additional cases to a very small number. On 27 March, WHO recommended additional measures aimed at preventing the travel-related spread of SARS. These recommended measures, which include screening of air passengers departing from certain areas, continue to apply. On 2 April, WHO recommended that persons travelling to Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and Guangdong Province, China consider postponing all but essential travel. This temporary recommendation has been reassessed daily and remains in effect. Subsequent information from the Chinese government about the magnitude of the SARS outbreaks in Beijing and Shanxi Province has been carefully reviewed by WHO. This assessment has considered the magnitude of the outbreak, including both the number of prevalent cases and the daily number of new cases, the extent of local chains of transmission, and evidence that travellers are becoming infected while in one area and then subsequently exporting the disease elsewhere. On the basis of this assessment, WHO is extending its 2 April travel advice to include Beijing and Shanxi Province. Using the same criteria, WHO has assessed the SARS situation in Toronto, Canada. The outbreak in this area has continued to grow in magnitude and has affected groups outside the initial risk groups of hospital workers, their families and other close person-to-person contacts, although all the cases reported have identified links to known SARS cases. In addition, a small number of persons with SARS, now in other countries in the world, appear to have acquired the infection while in Toronto. On the basis of this information, WHO is also including Toronto in the extension of its SARS-related travel advice. This advice will be re-examined in three weeks time, which is twice the maximum incubation period of SARS. The WHO travel advice is issued in order to protect public health and reduce opportunities for further international spread. SARS is a new disease, first recognized in late February, that has spread along the routes of international air travel. As of 22 April, a cumulative total of 3947 cases had been reported from 25 countries on five continents. Precautionary measures aim to reduce the impact of SARS and contain the disease while it is still in a relatively early stage. The SARS situation is assessed on a daily basis to determine whether other areas need to be included in the travel advice and if additional precautionary measures are required. All WHO SARS alerts, travel advice, daily cumulative case counts and other information are available at the WHO web site.	WHO	3650
<div></div>    "	2001 - Meningococcal disease, serogroup W135 - Update 16 May 2001 Disease Outbreak Reported During 2001 the following countries have reported cases of W135 meningococcal disease to WHO; most cases are associated with international travel or contact with travellers to Saudi Arabia: Burkina Faso: 4 cases have been reported. N. meningitidis serogroup W135 has been laboratory confirmed. Travel/contact history of cases is not yet known. Central African Republic : 3 cases (Haj pilgrims) have been reported. N. meningitidis serogroup W135 has been laboratory confirmed. Denmark: 2 cases (one case close contact with Haj pilgrims, the travel/contact history of the second case is not yet known)have been reported. N. meningitidis serogroup W135 has been laboratory confirmed. France : 2 cases (close contacts with Haj pilgrims) have been reported. N. meningitidis serogroup W135 has been laboratory confirmed. Norway: 4 cases (2 contacts with Haj pilgrims) have been reported. N. meningitidis serogroup W135 has been laboratory confirmed. Saudi Arabia : 109 cases (predominantly Haj pilgrims from outside Saudi Arabia) including 35 deaths have been reported between 9 February and 22 March 2001. N. meningitidis serogroup W135 has been laboratory confirmed in more than half of the cases. Singapore: 4 cases (3 close contacts with Haj pilgrims, 1 history of travel to Saudi Arabia), including 1 death have been reported. Two of the cases occurred in January 2001, before the main period of pilgrimage to Saudi Arabia. N. meningitidis serogroup W135 has been laboratory confirmed. United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland : 41 cases (8 pilgrims returning from the Haj, 19 cases of close contacts and data outstanding on the remaining cases) including 11 deaths of laboratory confirmed invasive N. meningitidis serogroup W135 have been reported. Meningococcal disease. As with all types of meningococcal disease, early diagnosis and treatment are essential. The symptoms of group W135 meningococcal disease are the same as for other groups of the disease: sudden onset of intense headache, high fever, nausea, and vomiting, photophobia and stiff neck. The most severe clinical form of the disease, meningococcal septicaemia can be presented by abrupt onset, high fever, petechial rash or purpura. WHO recommends that chemoprophylaxis be given to close contacts of the cases, such as persons sleeping in the same dwelling. In most countries rifampicin is recommended. In preparation for the Umrah and the Haj seasons for next year, the Ministry of Health of the Government of Saudi Arabia has notified the Ministries of Health of all countries from which pilgrims arrive, that the vaccination against meningococcal meningitis with the quadrivalent vaccine (serogroups A,C, Y and W135) has been added to the health requirements for arrivals coming to the Umrah and Haj. WHO encourages national reference laboratories to closely monitor meningococcal disease. In order to fully identify and follow the epidemiological spread of the W135 strain, WHO encourages countries to send specimens to WHO Collaborating Centres for Meningococcal Infections. The Centres are: Institut de M decine Tropicale du Service de Sant des Arm es Parc du Pharo, B.P. 46 F-13998 Marseille-Arm es France Dr. Pierre Nicolas Tel: +33 4 91 15 01 15 Fax: +33 4 91 59 44 77 E-mail:imtssa.meningo free.fr WHO Collaborating Centre for Control of Epidemic Meningitis Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Atlanta, GA 30333 United States of America Dr. Tanja Popovic Tel: +1 404 639 17 30 Fax: +1 404 639 31 23 E-mail: txp1 cdc.gov WHO Collaboration Centre for Reference and Research on Meningococci Department of Bacteriology National Institute of Public Health PO Box 4404 Torshov N-0403 Oslo Norway Dr. Dominique Caugant Tel: + 47 22 04 23 11 Fax: + 47 22 04 25 18 E-mail:dominique.caugant folkehelsa.no For further information, please contact: outbreak who.ch	WHO	3939
<div></div>    "	China reports additional SARS case - update 3 28 April 2004 Chinese health authorities have today announced that an additional case of SARS is under investigation. This brings the total number of cases in China, reported since 22 April, to nine. Of these, one has died. The new case, in Beijing, is a 49-year-old female retired doctor. On 12 April, she was admitted to the same hospital ward where a 20-year-old nurse was being treated for pneumonia. The former doctor began developing SARS-like symptoms on 19 April and on 22 April was transferred to Ditan Hospital and placed in isolation. Her condition is listed as critical. The 20-year-old nurse, previously reported to WHO as a confirmed case, has been linked to an additional five cases. These include the one reported today and four reported on Sunday. To date, all cases have been linked to chains of transmission involving close contact with an identified case. The second confirmed case, who remains hospitalized in Anhui Province, is a 26-year-old postgraduate student who had been conducting research at the National Institute of Virology in Beijing. She is thought to be the index case in the present outbreak. During the 2003 outbreak, the transmission of SARS was greatly amplified in hospital settings. As a risk reduction strategy in Beijing, all seven SARS cases are now being treated in Ditan Hospital. However, patients were treated or assessed in open wards at seven hospitals (five in Beijing and 2 in Anhui) before suspicions of SARS were raised and procedures of isolation and infection control were introduced. In addition, the two patients in Anhui travelled long distances within China by train. As these events created opportunities for multiple exposures, Chinese authorities have undertaken extensive tracing and follow-up of contacts. In Beijing, nearly 700 persons have been isolated or placed in quarantine. The maximum incubation period for SARS is generally accepted to be 10 days. Based on present knowledge about the disease, persons exposed to the virus are not infectious prior to the onset of symptoms. For these reasons, rapid detection and isolation of cases, and rapid tracing and follow-up of contacts have been successfully used to bring a SARS outbreak under control. Investigation of the outbreak Following a request by the Chinese Ministry of Health, the initial members of a WHO team are now in Beijing to assist in the investigation and control of the outbreaks there and in Anhui. Investigation of the source of infection will initially focus on biosafety procedures at the National Institute of Virology in Beijing. Two of the nine cases reported by China, including the earliest case, were researchers at the institute, which has been conducting work using the live SARS coronavirus. Chinese authorities are providing WHO with detailed clinical and epidemiological information on all cases. This information is important in assessing the severity of illness caused by the virus and the extent of its transmission. Of the 8 patients currently hospitalized for treatment, the patient in Anhui Province continues to improve. In Beijing, two patients are in critical condition and the others remain under treatment for pneumonia. If the source of infection is determined to come from the National Institute of Virology in Beijing, this will be the first SARS outbreak caused by a laboratory-acquired virus, which could possibly cause different patterns of illness and transmission. Previous laboratory-associated cases a single case each in Singapore in September 2003 and in Taiwan, China in December 2003 did not result in any further transmission. Both cases fully recovered. In addition, four cases (3 confirmed and 1 probable) were reported in Guangdong Province in December 2003 and January 2004, presumably acquired from an environmental source. Unlike the present outbreak, these cases were associated with mild illness only and did not result in secondary transmission to others.	WHO	3988
<div></div>    "	Avian influenza situation in Indonesia update 7 24 May 2007 The Ministry of Health of Indonesia has announced a new case of human infection of H5N1 avian influenza. A 5-year-old female from Wonogiri district, Central Java Province developed symptoms on 8 May, was hospitalized on 15 May and died in hospital on 17 May. Initial investigations into the source of her infection indicate exposure to dead poultry. Of the 97 cases confirmed to date in Indonesia, 77 have been fatal.	WHO	477
<div></div>    "	Ebola virus disease update - West Africa 6 August 2014 Epidemiology and surveillance Between 2 and 4 August 2014, a total of 108 new cases of Ebola virus disease (laboratory-confirmed, probable, and suspect cases) as well as 45 deaths were reported from Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone. Health sector response A mission briefing with representatives from Member States was held on 5 August at the World Health Organization (WHO). Information about the nature of Ebola virus disease (EVD) was highlighted. This was followed by outlining the essential components for control, including the need for national leadership, improved care and case management, identifying transmission chains and stopping disease spread, and preventing further outbreaks. Among the critical issues are: cross-border infections and travelers; partners reaching the limits of their capacity and ability to respond rapidly, safely, and effectively; and concerns about the socio-economic impact of continued transmission. The Director-General also shared information from her recent meetings in Guinea with Member States of the Mano River Union C te d Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. She outlined that the response in West Africa would focus on three areas: Treatment of Gu ck dou, Kenema, and Foya as a unified sector, which will include public health measures meant to reduce movement in and out of the area. Intensifying current measures in Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone. Taking steps to reduce international spread to other countries in Africa and outside of the African Region. The Sub-regional Ebola Operations Coordination Centre (SEOCC) in Conakry reported on 5 August that the following actions are underway in the four affected countries: In Guinea, new foci have emerged and case management facilities will be needed. Exit screening is currently being tested in Conakry, in partnership with the US CDC. In Liberia, security issues continue to be of concern, notwithstanding the commitment of the Government. Community resistance remains high. In Nigeria, the Government is focused on following up the contacts from the index case. Clinical support is urgently needed and a treatment centre is being set up for managing cases of EVD. In Sierra Leone, efforts are underway to map where treatment centres are most needed and getting those set up. A similar exercise is underway for laboratories. The SEOCC is assisting countries with these and many other response measures. On 6 August, WHO is convening an Emergency Committee of international experts to review the outbreak and advise the Director-General, in accordance with the International Health Regulations, whether the Ebola virus disease outbreak constitutes a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Experts will receive an epidemiological briefing and will determine whether the criteria for a PHEIC have been met. If the Emergency Committee agrees that this is a PHEIC, they will then advise the Director-General on temporary recommendations. A summary of the meeting will be made public and a press briefing will be held on Friday, 8 August. Disease update New cases and deaths attributable to EVD continue to be reported by the Ministries of Health in Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone. Between 2 and 4 August 2014, 108 new cases (laboratory-confirmed, probable, and suspect cases) of EVD and 45 deaths were reported from the four countries as follows: Guinea, 10 new cases and 5 deaths; Liberia, 48 new cases and 27 deaths; Nigeria, 5 new cases and 0 death; and Sierra Leone, 45 new cases and 13 deaths. As of 4 August 2014, the cumulative number of cases attributed to EVD in the four countries stands at 1 711, including 932 deaths. The distribution and classification of the cases are as follows: Guinea, 495 cases (351 confirmed, 133 probable, and 11 suspected), including 363 deaths; Liberia, 516 cases (143 confirmed, 252 probable, and 121 suspected), including 282 deaths; Nigeria, 9 cases (0 confirmed, 2 probable, and 7 suspected), including 1 death; and Sierra Leone, 691 cases (576 confirmed, 49 probable, and 66 suspected), including 286 deaths. Confirmed, probable, and suspect cases and deaths from Ebola virus disease in Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone, as of 4 August 2014 New Confirmed Probable Suspect Totals Guinea Cases 10 351 133 11 495 Deaths 5 228 133 2 363 Liberia Cases 48 143 252 121 516 Deaths 27 128 110 44 282 Nigeria Cases 5 0 2 7 9 Deaths 0 0 1 0 1 Sierra Leone Cases 45 576 49 66 691 Deaths 13 247 34 5 286 Totals Cases 108 1 070 436 205 1 711 Deaths 45 603 278 51 932 1. New cases were reported between 2 and 4 August 2014. The total number of cases is subject to change due to reclassification, retrospective investigation, consolidation of cases and laboratory data, and enhanced surveillance. Data reported in the Disease Outbreak News are based on best available information reported by Ministries of Health.	WHO	4963
<div></div>    "	1998 - Cholera in the Comoros Islands 10 February 1998 Disease Outbreak Reported Up to 7 February a total of 193 cases with 8 deaths (CFR 4.14%) had been reported on Grande Comore Island. Although the first cases were recorded in Mb ni, 77 of the 193 cases have occurred in Moroni and 12 districts and villages in and around the capital. Measures to prevent further spread and for the effective treatment of cases have been implemented by the cholera task force which was recently set-up by the Ministry of Health and WHO.	WHO	522
<div></div>    "	Avian influenza situation in China update 7 8 March 2006 The Ministry of Health in China has reported the country s 10th death from H5N1 avian influenza. The patient, a 9-year-old girl from the eastern province of Zhejiang, developed symptoms on 10 February and died on 6 March. This case was previously announced by Chinese authorities on 27 February, when the patient was listed as in critical condition. To date, China has reported 15 laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with the H5N1 avian influenza virus. Of these, 10 have been fatal.	WHO	550
<div></div>    "	Avian influenza - situation in Egypt - update 4 15 February 2007 The Egyptian Ministry of Health and Population has announced a new human case of avian influenza A(H5N1) virus infection. The case was confirmed by the Egyptian Central Public Health Laboratory and by the US Naval Medical Research Unit No.3 (NAMRU-3). The 37-year-old female from Fayyoum Governorate was admitted to hospital with symptoms on 12 February 2007 and her condition remains stable. She was involved in the slaughter and defeathering of sick birds one week prior to the onset of illness. Of the 21 cases confirmed to date in Egypt, 12 have been fatal.	WHO	626
<div></div>    "	2002 - Cholera in Liberia 13 September 2002 Disease Outbreak Reported As of 1 September 2002 WHO has received reports of 661 cases of cholera in Montserado County. The Ministry of Health and Social Welfare met with WHO, UNICEF, M decins sans Fronti res (MSF Belgium ) and other nongovernmental organizations to discuss measures to contain the outbreak. As a result, a team from the Ministry of Health and WHO assessed the epidemiological situation in the county, including the camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs). The team recommended chlorinating of water in and around Monrovia as well as in the IDP camps. Community-based health promotion activities in the affected areas were also recommended.	WHO	707
<div></div>    "	Avian influenza - situation in Egypt - update 4 9 February 2009 - The Ministry of Health and Population of Egypt has announced a new human case of avian influenza A(H5N1) virus infection. The case is a one and a half year old male from the Maghagha District of Menia Governorate. His symptoms began on 6 February and he was hospitalized at the Maghagha Fever Hospital on 7 February where he remains in a stable condition. Infection with the H5N1 avian influenza virus was confirmed by the Egyptian Central Public Health Laboratory. Investigations into the source of his infection indicate a history of close contact with dead poultry prior to becoming ill. Of the 55 cases confirmed to date in Egypt, 23 have been fatal.	WHO	720
<div></div>    "	Avian influenza situation in Indonesia 6 May 2010 - The Ministry of Health of Indonesia has announced two new confirmed cases of human infection with the H5N1 avian influenza virus. A 45-year-old female from the city of Malang in East Java province developed symptoms on 22 February. She recovered and is in a healthy condition. The case disposed of dead chickens in the 4 days before onset of symptoms. The second case, a 4-year-old female from the city of Pekanbaru in Riau province developed symptoms on 19 April, was hospitalized on 22 April but died on 28 April. Investigations into the source of infection are ongoing. Laboratory tests on both cases confirmed infection with the H5N1 avian influenza virus. Of the 165 cases confirmed to date in Indonesia, 136 have been fatal.	WHO	782
<div></div>    "	Avian influenza situation in Indonesia update 10 August 2012 - The Ministry of Health of Indonesia has notified WHO of a new case of human infection with avian influenza A(H5N1) virus. The case is a 37 year old male from Yogyakarta province. He developed fever on 24 July 2012, was hospitalized on 27 July and died on 30 July. Epidemiological investigation on the case found that the case had four pet caged birds in his home, which is about 50 metres from a poultry slaughter house and near a farm. Infection with avian influenza A(H5N1) virus was confirmed by the National Institute of Health Research and Development (NIHRD), Ministry of Health and reported to WHO by the National IHR Focal Point. To date, the total number of human influenza A(H5N1) cases in Indonesia is 191 with 159 fatalities, 8 (all fatal) of which occurred in 2012.	WHO	841
<div></div>    "	1999 - Malaria in Burundi 25 June 1999 Disease Outbreak Reported Between January and May 1999, a total of 616 034 cases of malaria was reported by health centres. In January, all provinces were affected, and although only 75% of provinces were affected in May, there was a significant increase in some (especially Karusi, with 2.5 times more cases in May than in April). A comparison of data for May 1998 and May 1999 has shown that in some provinces, cases have increased very sharply (e.g. Mutoyi, from 3 094 to 7 568; Rutoke, from 293 to 1 768). Figures concerning the number of deaths are not available for all provinces. In Mutoyi, a total of 17 deaths was registered between January and May; in Karusi, 34 deaths were recorded between 15 May and 15 June. The local health authorities have taken the necessary measures to mobilize resources for drug procurement, reinforced epidemiological surveillance and vector control.	WHO	927
<div></div>    "	Avian influenza A(H5N1) - update 16: Situation in Viet Nam 3 February 2004 The Ministry of Health in Viet Nam has today officially confirmed three additional cases, including one fatality, of avian influenza H5N1 infection in humans. Two of the newly reported cases, a 19-year-old man and a 20-year-old woman, have been under treatment at a hospital in Hanoi. The 19-year-old man has recovered and the 20-year-old woman remains hospitalized. The third case, which was fatal, was in an 18-year-old man who died on 2 February at a hospital in Ho Chi Minh City. He is the country s first confirmed case from the Central Highlands area. These newly reported cases bring the number of laboratory confirmed H5N1 cases in Viet Nam to 13. Of these, nine have died, two remain hospitalized, and two have recovered. Authorities in Viet Nam have reported that 52 of the country s 64 provinces have now detected outbreaks of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza in poultry.	WHO	963
PUBMED_42710724	PubMed	2026	A 29-plex MOL-PCR assay for simultaneous detection of selected major, non-typing, and accessory virulence genes in Clostridium perfringens. Clostridium perfringens is an important pathogen of humans and animals, responsible for a broad spectrum of diseases mediated by diverse toxins and virulence factors. Precise and extended toxin-gene profiling is valuable for strain characterization and molecular epidemiological surveillance. Here, we describe the development of a 29-plex Multiple Oligonucleotide Ligation PCR (MOL-PCR) assay that enables the simultaneous detection of a large and important panel of 27 C. perfringens toxin-related genes - covering major typing toxins as well as an extended panel of non-typing and accessory virulence genes - thus moving beyond the classical toxinotyping framework. The assay was evaluated in comparison with six multiplex qPCR assays. In both systems, the gene encoding the Clostridium perfringens-specific serine O-acetyltransferase (EpsC) was used as a molecular marker for species confirmation, and an internal amplification control was included to detect potentially false-negative results. Analytical specificity testing confirmed exclusive amplification in C. perfringens and sequencing confirmed the toxin-gene profiles of reference strains. Comparative analysis of 72 reference and field isolates (1,944 data points) demonstrated complete concordance for 637 positive detections, yielding 100% positive agreement and 99.7% negative agreement relative to the comparative qPCR method. The limit of detection was 100 fg/ l (approx. 3 101 genome equivalents; GE) for qPCR and 1 pg/ l (approx. 3 102 GE) for MOL-PCR. Despite its high multiplex level, MOL-PCR showed high agreement with qPCR. The developed MOL-PCR method provides a rapid, high-throughput, and cost-effective tool for expanded toxin-gene profiling of C. perfringens isolates targeting major typing toxins and selected non-typing and accessory virulence genes. Therefore, it may support advanced toxin-gene characterization, molecular epidemiology, and One Health-oriented surveillance of evolving virulence landscapes.
PUBMED_42704147	PubMed	2026	A Computational Study of HCOO Spillover on Cu UiO-66. Spillover phenomena play a pivotal role in heterogeneous catalysis; however, the migration of the formate (HCOO) species remains scarcely investigated. Herein, we present a systematic density functional theory (DFT) study elucidating the distinct spillover patterns of HCOO on Cu surfaces and at the interface between Cu nanoclusters and the UiO-66 metal-organic framework. Our findings indicate that HCOO migration is generally facile at ambient conditions on the Cu surface, at the interfacial site, or between them, but it becomes kinetically difficult when steric hindrance and electronic repulsion of coadsorbed reactants are involved. The present work also includes exploration of H spillover patterns, all of which are found to be kinetically favorable on the Cu surface.
PUBMED_42744038	PubMed	2026	A Multi-model Counterfactual Analysis of Human Brucellosis in China: Spatiotemporal Epidemiology and Heterogeneous Pandemic-associated Deviations in 2020. OBJECTIVES: This study examined long-term spatiotemporal patterns of human brucellosis in China and assessed whether reported incidence in 2020 differed from expected levels during the COVID-19 pandemic. METHODS: We analyzed surveillance data from 31 provincial-level regions in mainland China from 2004 to 2020. Joinpoint regression assessed national trends. Seasonal indices, spatial autocorrelation, and space-time scan statistics were used to examine monthly variation and geographic clustering. Province-specific forecasting models estimated expected case counts. RESULTS: National incidence increased from 2004 to 2014 and declined thereafter, with an overall average annual percent change (AAPC) of 6.03% across the full 2004-2020 study period. Cases regularly peaked from March to July. Farmers and herders accounted for most cases, while adults aged 45 years represented an increasing share. Persistent hotspots were concentrated in northern pastoral and agro-pastoral provinces. The largest space-time cluster included Inner Mongolia and Shanxi during 2008-2015. In 2020, observed cases varied from forecast levels across provinces and seasons. Qinghai and Anhui showed excess cases in both peak and non-peak seasons, while Guizhou exhibited more pronounced excess in the non-peak season; by contrast, Heilongjiang reported consistently fewer cases than expected. CONCLUSIONS: Human brucellosis in China remains seasonal, spatially concentrated, and increasingly linked to older livestock workers. Prevention should focus on persistent endemic hotspots, periods of intensified livestock-related exposure, particularly the livestock birthing season, and sustained surveillance capacity during public health emergencies.
PUBMED_42779994	PubMed	2026	A Multiphase Implementation of Ring Treatment: A Community-Engaged Control Program for T. Solium taeniasis/cysticercosis in Northern Peru. Background Cysticercosis (CC) is a zoonotic disease transmitted between pigs and humans, caused by the larval stage of T. solium that leads to neurological morbidity in humans and economic losses in pig-farming communities in low-resource rural regions. Ring Treatment (RT) is an evidence-based intervention that integrates a community participatory approach to provide antiparasitic treatment to households within 100-meters of an infected pig. This study aimed to evaluate the multiphase implementation of RT as a public health program in northern Peru, with a focus on feasibility, adoption, and sustainability. Methods We conducted a multi-method, three-phase implementation study from 2019-2025 in Tumbes, Peru. Phase 1 involved a formative evaluation using the expanded Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research for low- and middle-income countries. We used semi-structured interviews (n 169), social network surveys (n 341), and two process-mapping workshops (n 26) to describe barriers, facilitators, and RT protocol adaptations. In phase 2, we piloted RT in a small health district, reviewed registries, and conducted community surveys and interviews for quality improvement. In phase 3, we rolled out RT in two districts and applied the RE-AIM framework to assess implementation outcomes. Quantitative data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, while qualitative data underwent rapid qualitative analysis and template analysis (thematic analysis for hierarchical coding). Results Key facilitators included adaptability of existing health programs and strong engagement with community health workers (CHW) and communities. Barriers included high staff turnover, workload, and resource constraints. The pilot study achieved 75% treatment coverage among eligible populations, increased community knowledge of the CC transmission cycle, and prompted regional-level policy changes. During the RT rollout, 100% of health facilities established RT procedures, with moderate participation in training and treatment (53% and 87%). However, the COVID-19 pandemic and political instability limited the effectiveness of assessments and the completeness of data. Conclusions RT is feasible and acceptable as a public health program for T. solium control in rural, endemic, low-resource settings. Success hinges on community and CHW involvement, adaptive protocols, and cross-sectoral partnerships. Continued investment in One Health approaches that view the human-animal-environment intersection as central to health is needed to sustain and expand progress in controlling zoonoses.
PUBMED_42711003	PubMed	2026	A One Health approach to Antimicrobial Resistance: Concepts, challenges, and advances in omics. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a global threat driven by the interplay between microbial evolution and human activity. Antimicrobial use in human and veterinary medicine, as well as in agriculture, accelerates the selection and dissemination of resistant bacteria and genes across interconnected human, animal, and environmental reservoirs. These dynamic exchanges render single-sector interventions ineffective. A One Health approach integrating human, animal, and environmental health is therefore essential to understand and mitigate the emergence and spread of AMR. This chapter focuses on bacterial antimicrobial resistance, addressing key concepts, major challenges, and emerging technologies within a One Health framework. Advances in next-generation sequencing and omics technologies have transformed our capacity to resolve AMR at unprecedented scale and resolution. These tools enable the tracking of resistance genes and high-risk clones across ecosystems, uncover transmission pathways, and identify key drivers of dissemination. Such insights support real-time epidemiological surveillance, outbreak detection, and targeted interventions. However, translating these advances into routine practice remains a major challenge, requiring harmonized methodologies, data integration, and cross-sector coordination. Addressing AMR demands sustained collaboration across disciplines and stakeholders, including clinicians, veterinarians, farmers, researchers, policymakers, industry, and the public. And framing AMR as a shared ecological and societal responsibility underscores the urgency of coordinated global action. We call for the urgent integration of One Health principles into surveillance, policy, and innovation to preserve antimicrobial effectiveness and safeguard future health.
PUBMED_42770716	PubMed	2026	A One Health perspective on mobile genetic elements and associated antibiotic resistance genes in non-human A. baumannii. Acinetobacter baumannii has become a global public health concern. Although it has traditionally been associated with hospital settings, it has also been detected in companion animals, livestock, and wildlife, as well as in food and environmental sources, particularly aquatic ones. This review provides an overview of some mobile genetic elements (MGEs) (insertion sequences, transposons, and plasmids) within non-human populations of A. baumannii. These MGEs have been associated with antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in both human and nonhuman settings. Importantly, the presence of clinically relevant lineages in non-hospital environments suggests circulation between human and non-human populations. The current evidence suggests that non-human populations and their MGEs may act as reservoirs and disseminators of resistance genes. Overall, these findings broaden its ecological spectrum and reinforce the need for a comprehensive One Health approach.
PUBMED_42786614	PubMed	2026	A Preliminary Field Study to Evaluate the Efficacy of Spiramycin and Paromomycin Against Cattle Cryptosporidiosis. INTRODUCTION: Cryptosporidium is responsible not only for large economic losses in the livestock sector, but also for high mortality in infants and immunocompromised people all over the world. Although multiple treatments have been tested in both animals and humans, no drug has yet been found to be 100% effective. The aim of this study was to determine the efficacy of different treatments, previously used in humans, against cryptosporidiosis in calves. METHODS: Faecal samples were collected twice a week for 4 consecutive weeks from a total of 83 animals divided into different experimental groups: control group (no treatment) (C), group treated with spiramycin (S), group treated with paromomycin (P) and group treated with the combination of spiramycin and paromomycin (SP). After concentration by ether sedimentation and subsequent Kinyoun staining, stool samples were analysed to estimate the number of oocysts excreted. In addition, different clinical symptoms, such as the type of diarrhoea, the level of dehydration, etc., were evaluated. RESULTS: The control group had higher levels of oocyst excretion than treated groups. Besides, both spiramycin and paromomycin given alone or in combination delayed the peak oocyst excretion and improved symptomatology. CONCLUSIONS: Between the two drugs, paromomycin seems to be more effective, but spiramycin administered alone also had an effective impact, so it may be an alternative treatment for cryptosporidiosis in calves in case of resistance to other drugs.
PUBMED_42783954	PubMed	2026	A Review of the Therapeutic Challenges and Novel Treatment Options in Mitigating Invasive Mycosis Associated with Aspergillus, Candida, Cryptococcus, and Pneumocystis. Globally, invasive fungal diseases are increasing in incidence and are associated with high rates of mortality. A lack of effective diagnostic protocols, antifungal resistance and poor antifungal stewardship contribute to negative outcomes. Aspergillus, Candida, Cryptococcus, and Pneumocystis are the most common pathogens associated with fatal fungal diseases. These species are responsible for 90% of reported invasive fungal deaths globally. Fungal species employ a diverse and effective array of virulence factors to sabotage, evade, and manipulate host immune systems, allowing for colonisation and dissemination in vivo. Invasive fungal infections are clinically challenging, as they penetrate organs and deep tissues, contributing to the aetiology of respiratory tract, endocarditis, meningitis, and medical device infections and resulting in false negative diagnostic attempts. The 2025 WHO report outlines a lack of diagnostic and therapeutic options available, especially in low-to-middle-income countries. Geographical and economic factors impact fungal disease and mortality rates. There is an urgent need for new approaches to combat fungal diseases clinically with improved biocompatibility profiles. This timely review discusses the prevalent invasive fungal species, namely, Candida, Aspergillus, Cryptococcus, and Pneumocystis, which have high mortality rates, as identified by the WHO priority pathogen list, and discusses recent advances in the treatment of fungal diseases. This dissemination of information is an important aspect of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and One Health.
PUBMED_42722042	PubMed	2026	A comprehensive review of donkey (Equus asinus) industry development in Pakistan with current and future prospects. The donkey (Equus asinus) plays a pivotal role in the daily life of farmers and underpins the rural and peri urban economy of Pakistan. Pakistan is the world's third-largest donkey-rearing country, with an estimated population of 5.4-6.0 million head. Despite their economic significance, donkeys have been neglected in research, care, welfare, and policy formulation, creating a significant knowledge gap in donkey industry development in Pakistan. This review synthesizes national livestock data (1976- 2025), equid population comparisons, geographic distribution, and field-based reports. According to the Pakistan Economic Survey, the national donkey population grew from 3.9 million (2001) to 6.0 million (2025), a 53.8% increase, and donkeys now constitute 90.9% of Pakistan's equid population. Punjab province holds the highest share (2.40 million) followed by Sindh (1.08 million), Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (0.78 million), and Balochistan (0.63 million). Welfare assessments indicate widespread poor body condition, excessive workload, and preventable injuries among working donkeys, with clear implications for public and animal health under a One Health framework. Moreover, this review compares Pakistan's donkey production context with China's established industry model and presents a three-phase strategic plan focused on policy reform, value chain development, and capacity building.
PUBMED_42787561	PubMed	2026	A conserved virulence backbone and heterogeneous type III secretion effector profiles in historical canine otitis-associated Pseudomonas aeruginosa from Hungary. BACKGROUND: Canine otitis externa provides a chronic, inflamed and frequently antimicrobial-exposed niche in which Pseudomonas aeruginosa can persist through a coordinated repertoire of adhesion, biofilm, iron-acquisition, secretion and toxin systems. METHODS: We characterized the virulence-associated genomic architecture of a historical Hungarian collection obtained from canine otitis cases in 2010 and 2017. Of the 70 isolate identifiers in the nominal range 70-139, 60 had corresponding long-read assemblies and linked VFDB screening records. One assembly was excluded after genome-based taxonomic validation showed that it did not meet the species-level criterion for P. aeruginosa. RESULTS: Primary absence-sensitive analyses were restricted to 52 genome-confirmed P. aeruginosa assemblies meeting prespecified CheckM criteria (completeness 95%, contamination 5%), while seven additional genome-confirmed P. aeruginosa assemblies that did not meet the primary CheckM criteria were retained only for descriptive contextualization and were excluded from prevalence denominators and absence-sensitive analyses. The primary cohort contained 242 distinct virulence-associated genes, with a median of 230.5 genes per isolate. Of these, 217 (89.7%) were core-like, occurring in at least 95% of genomes. Alginate, type IV pilus, flagellar, siderophore, phenazine, quorum-sensing, type II, type III and type VI secretion backbones were broadly conserved. In contrast, type III effector content was heterogeneous: exoT occurred in 52/52 isolates, exoY in 50/52, exoS in 49/52 and exoU in 4/52; one isolate showed assembly-level co-detection of exoS and an exoU-homologous sequence. Whole-virulome composition did not differ detectably between 2010 and 2017 (square-root Jaccard PERMANOVA, R2 0.0134, p 0.6083), and no individual gene remained associated with collection year after false-discovery-rate correction. CONCLUSION: These data define a conserved historical virulence-associated genomic backbone punctuated by isolate-level effector and surface-structure variation. The detected genes are interpreted as genomic homologues and repertoire features rather than as evidence of their expression or functional contribution to pathogenicity.
PUBMED_42710214	PubMed	2026	A convolutional neural network-based machine learning prototype for accurate identification of five Hyalomma tick species in Tunisia: Development and assessment of an experimental prototype. Accurate tick species identification is essential for vector surveillance and control of tick-borne diseases, but conventional morphological diagnosis remains challenging for closely related Hyalomma species. This study developed and evaluated a deep learning-based framework for automated recognition of five medically and veterinary important Hyalomma species from Tunisia. A dataset of 1344 dorsal and ventral images of morphologically identified ticks was generated from livestock specimens, including 484 H. marginatum, H. 418 dromedarii, 79 H. excavatum, 62 H. impeltatum, and 301 H. scupense. An integrated YOLOv11-CNN cascade pipeline was designed for tick detection, genus-level filtering against non-Hyalomma arthropods, dorsal/ventral orientation recognition, sex determination, and species-level classification. Performance was assessed using standard classification metrics, YOLO-specific detection metrics, confusion matrices, and LIME-based explainability analysis. The YOLOv11 model reliably detected tick regions, while the taxonomic filtering module discriminated Hyalomma ticks from other arthropod genera, including Argas, Ixodes, Rhipicephalus, and Melophagus. CNN classifiers achieved high performance for sex determination and species recognition, with species-level accuracy ranging from 97% to 100% under controlled laboratory imaging conditions. LIME analysis indicated that model predictions were associated with biologically relevant morphological regions used in classical tick taxonomy. This study provides a first YOLOv11-CNN cascade prototype for automated identification of closely related Hyalomma species and offers a promising decision-support tool for standardized tick identification, veterinary diagnostics, and future One Health surveillance after integreting future studies involving larger and geographically diverse collections will be necessary to further improve model robustness and transferability.
PUBMED_42788720	PubMed	2026	A deeply divergent TcdB-like toxin in a cryptic clade C-III Clostridioides strain from a One Health genomic survey in Japan. In a recent One Health genomic survey of community-associated Clostridioides difficile in Japan, S. Yoshizawa, K. Komori, K. Aoki, T. Sawa, et al. (Appl Environ Microbiol 92:e00397-26, 2026, https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.00397-26) deposited the genome of strain TUM20227, a human tcdA-/tcdB+ isolate assigned to the novel sequence type ST919. Reanalysis of its publicly available genome shows that TUM20227 belongs to cryptic clade C-III and carries a chromosomally encoded, monotoxin PaLoc-like locus encoding a 2,367-amino acid TcdB-family protein. This TcdB-like protein shares less than 83% amino acid identity with all recognized TcdB subtypes (B1-B12) and forms a deeply divergent branch in both full-length and domain-resolved phylogenies, with heterogeneous nearest neighbors across domains and an atypical predicted receptor-binding profile. TcdBTUM20227 should therefore be regarded as representative of a previously unrecognized, deeply divergent TcdB lineage.IMPORTANCEClostridioides difficile is a leading cause of diarrhea, and its principal virulence factor, the toxin TcdB, is both a diagnostic target and a template for therapeutics. The recognized diversity of TcdB is captured in a scheme composed of 12 subtypes largely built from strains of the five C. difficile clades, whereas the Clostridioides cryptic clades and their toxins remain comparatively underexplored, even though they can encode divergent toxins with altered receptor use and antigenicity. Here, reanalysis of a single, previously unremarked genome from a One Health survey uncovers a deeply divergent and apparently complete and intact TcdB-family toxin gene whose product falls outside the established subtype framework. This finding shows that systematic data mining of animal, human, and environmental strains can unearth novel toxin genes and provide critical insight into the evolution, receptor specificity, and subtype boundaries of the toxin genes of this important human pathogen.
PUBMED_42682550	PubMed	2026	A family cluster of brucellosis in an underserved urban community in Guayaquil city, Ecuador. Brucellosis is a neglected bacterial zoonosis caused by Brucella spp. with worldwide distribution. Infection typically occurs through direct contact with infected animals or consumption of unpasteurized dairy products, and the global burden of brucellosis is estimated over two million cases per year. In Latin America, brucellosis remains endemic, with important public health and economic consequences. Here, we report a family cluster of brucellosis in Guayaquil, Ecuador, involving six confirmed cases, including pediatric patients. We describe the clinical and epidemiological features of this family cluster and present omp28 sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of the index case, highlighting the public health significance of B. abortus transmission in an underserved urban community. The epidemiological link of this urban family cluster to unpasteurized dairy products reinforced the need of an integrated One Health surveillance and control program from brucellosis beyond rural areas.
PUBMED_42674136	PubMed	2026	A review of ticks and tick-borne diseases in Southeast Asia: identifying priorities, hurdles, and opportunities for health and knowledge gain. Ticks and tick-borne diseases (TBDs) in Southeast Asia are poorly understood, confounding surveillance, and mitigation opportunities. Herein, we conducted a survey of experts (n 25) to identify tick species and TBDs of greatest concern to Southeast Asia, 'drivers' which may alter their impacts, and research hurdles. These experts identified Dermacentor auratus, Haemaphysalis longicornis, Rhipicephalus linnaei, Amblyomma testudinarium sensu lato, Ixodes granulatus, Ixodes persulcatus, and Rhipicephalus microplus as ticks of greatest concern; and rickettsioses, severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus, borreliosis, Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever, anaplasmosis, tick-borne encephalitis, and novel tick-borne viruses as TBDs of greatest concern. Land-use change was expected to have the largest impact on ticks and TBDs, followed by climate change, invasive species, and drug resistance. The three biggest research hurdles were lack of funding, lack of awareness, and lack of taxonomic expertise. Addressing these near-term priorities and hurdles while harmonizing research efforts and surveillance within, and between countries may help lay the groundwork for future research and surveillance efforts in the region, and may also enhance the region's preparedness, ultimately leading to better health outcomes for the region.
PUBMED_42771665	PubMed	2026	A single-cycle, recombinant VSV platform Nipah vaccine cross-protects against Hendra virus in nonhuman primates. Nipah virus (NiV) and Hendra virus (HeV) are highly pathogenic paramyxoviruses that produce severe, often fatal disease in humans and animals. Zoonotic spillover of these henipaviruses from the Pteropid bat natural reservoir occurs near-annually in Southeast Asia and Oceania. Outbreaks of NiV disease frequently exceed case fatality rates of 75%, and person-to-person transmission makes controlling outbreaks in low-resource environments challenging. HeV is less transmissible between humans; however, the overall mortality rate is 57%. Approaches to human vaccine development have largely focused on NiV given the larger case burden, and immunogen selection has centered on display of the NiV attachment (G) or fusion (F) surface glycoproteins. However, experimental vaccines displaying these NiV antigens have failed to uniformly cross-protect against HeV disease in preclinical models. The HeV (G) antigen was shown to cross-protect against both HeV and NiV when delivered in a protein subunit form; however, attempts to utilize mRNA or canarypox vectors failed to achieve equivalent protection. We previously developed and evaluated a single-cycle recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus-vectored vaccine displaying the (G) glycoprotein of Nipah virus strain Bangladesh (NiV-B). This experimental vaccine (G rVSV G-NiV-G) demonstrated ideal characteristics of rapid and durable protection against NiV-B challenge in nonhuman primates. In the present work, we show that the G rVSV G-NiV-G vaccine cross-protects against lethal HeV challenge, with the protective response driven by a balance of both cell-mediated and humoral compartments.
PUBMED_42707175	PubMed	2026	A streamlined protocol for small-scale protoplast generation and CRISPR/Cpf1-mediated genome editing in Fusarium oxysporum. Fusarium oxysporum is a significant threat to agriculture and One Health, requiring advanced molecular tools for functional genomic analyses and biological control agent development. Existing gene-editing methods are hampered by costly protoplast preparation protocols and by CRISPR-Cas9 limitations, such as restricted protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) sequences and complex guide RNA requirements. We engineered an efficient CRISPR/Cpf1 system that overcomes these issues through three main innovations: small-scale protoplast generation using filter column-based methods that greatly reduce enzyme consumption while simplifying workflows, a CRISPR/Cpf1 system with shorter guide RNA design and staggered DNA cleavage to promote homologous recombination, and minimal homology arm strategies that significantly decrease cloning complexity. Extensive validation confirms successful gene targeting with molecular verification and functional analysis via standardized pathogenicity assays. This integrated platform offers affordable, accessible tools for systematic F. oxysporum research, enhancing fundamental understanding of plant-pathogen interactions and supporting high-throughput screening vital for agricultural biotechnology and biological agent development.
PUBMED_42709755	PubMed	2026	A study on the efficiency and spatial correlation of health resource allocation in Chinese hospitals. BACKGROUND: This study quantitatively evaluated the efficiency of hospital healthcare resource allocation across 31 provinces in China from 2019 to 2023, with the aim of providing evidence-based decision support for improving resource utilization efficiency and promoting the sustainable development of medical institutions. METHODS: A three-stage Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA)-Malmquist model was employed to estimate both static and dynamic efficiency in hospital healthcare resource allocation. Spatial autocorrelation of efficiency was examined using Moran's I to identify regional spatial dependence patterns. RESULTS: The average comprehensive efficiency of healthcare resource allocation in Chinese hospitals was below 1, indicating substantial room for improvement in overall efficiency, though an overall upward trend was observed during the study period. After controlling for environmental factors, the mean comprehensive efficiency declined from 0.858 to 0.827, suggesting that external environmental conditions influenced actual efficiency to some extent. Dynamic analysis indicated that technical efficiency was the primary constraint on total factor productivity growth. In regional comparisons, after accounting for environmental factors, the efficiency ranking shifted from the original pattern of eastern central western to a temporary order of central eastern western. Spatial analysis indicated a significant positive spatial correlation in resource allocation efficiency. A stable high-efficiency cluster persisted in the region south of the Yangtze River, while low-efficiency clusters had largely dissipated by 2023, reflecting a convergence trend of provincial efficiency levels toward the efficiency frontier. CONCLUSIONS: Hospital efficiency in China exhibits a distinct east-to-west gradient. However, after adjusting for environmental heterogeneity, the central region temporarily outperformed the eastern region, highlighting the confounding effects of external factors. Robust spatial spillover effects were observed. Policy interventions should therefore prioritize targeted efficiency improvements in low-efficiency cold-spot provinces over mere input expansion. The bias-corrected efficiency scores and spatial clustering patterns provide a validated benchmark for national and regional health resource planning.
PUBMED_42733754	PubMed	2026	A systematic review of Leptospira and leptospirosis in wildlife: A global perspective. There are many different pathogenic species of Leptospira that circulate among a wide range of wild and domestic animals. Certain species and serovars can cause disease in some hosts but not in others. Although leptospirosis has been extensively studied in humans and domestic animals, with its epidemiology and economic impact being well characterized, much less is known about its ecological dynamics in wildlife. The host-pathogen associations, transmission pathways, and disease outcomes in wild animal populations remain poorly understood. This review summarizes the current evidence on Leptospira and leptospirosis in wildlife, identifying methodological biases and highlighting key knowledge gaps. It also compiles information on wild animal species in which exposure to the pathogen has been documented. A systematic search of the scientific literature published between 2000 and 2025 was performed across multiple databases in accordance with PRISMA guidelines. Following screening and an assessment of eligibility, data were extracted from 389 peer-reviewed articles reporting exposure to, infection with, or detection of the pathogen in wildlife species worldwide. An analysis of study locations and publication trends was also performed. The reviewed studies revealed substantial heterogeneity in diagnostic methods, sampling effort, and geographic coverage, as well as a wide taxonomic diversity of wildlife species exposed to or infected with Leptospira. Clinical cases were most frequently reported in the orders Carnivora and Rodentia, with mortality documented in marine mammals, large felids and primates, particularly in untreated cases. Analysis of carriage and exposure studies revealed a strong sampling bias toward mammals compared to birds and reptiles. Molecular detection was reported in 155 articles, with lipL32 being the most commonly used marker. Sequencing of amplicons enabled identification of Leptospira at the level of the species. Meanwhile, serological testing predominantly relied on MAT reporting.
PUBMED_42780467	PubMed	2026	A systematic review of selected food-borne helminthiases in Southeast Asia with emphasis on anthelminthic treatment regimens. Food-borne helminth infections impose a substantial public health burden worldwide, particularly in tropical and subtropical regions. Environmental, socioeconomic, behavioral, and cultural factors all favor sustained transmission of food-borne helminths, especially in Southeast Asia (SEA). To provide an updated overview of the distribution, prevalence, and treatment regimens for six important food-borne helminths (Opisthorchis viverrini, Fasciola spp., Taenia spp., Angiostrongylus spp., Gnathostoma spinigerum, and Trichinella spp.) in SEA, a systematic review following the PRISMA guidelines was conducted. Anthelminthic drug treatment regimens based on the extracted studies were compared with those recommended by internationally recognized organizations. Of the 11 SEA countries, the highest proportion of peer-reviewed articles (47.2%) originated from Thailand, followed by Lao PDR (20.2%). All six helminths were reported in Vietnam, while five were found in Thailand. Meta-analyses were conducted for O. viverrini, taeniasis, and cysticercosis, as these had the greatest number of articles, and the overall pooled prevalences were 22.2%, 3.4%, and 4.7%, respectively. The country with the highest prevalence for O. viverrini infection and taeniasis was Lao PDR, with a prevalence of 43.2% and 3.6%, respectively. Drug treatment regimens reported in studies from SEA are in line with relevant international recommendations. However, the continued presence of food-borne helminthiases suggests sustained transmission despite appropriate treatment regimens. Moreover, the uneven distribution of studies across SEA reflects differences in research emphasis and diagnostic capabilities, highlighting the need for strengthened surveillance and coordinated efforts, especially in underrepresented countries. A One Health approach and regional collaborations will be critical for reducing the burden of food-borne helminthiases.
PUBMED_42687260	PubMed	2026	Acute Q Fever in Patients with Risk Factors for a Focalized Persistent Infection - Can Prolonged Antimicrobial Therapy Prevent this Complication? . Q fever is a zoonotic disease, which is endemic in Israel. Most patients have an acute infection, but some cases manifest as a persistent focalized infection. Risk factors for a persistent focalized infection include significant valvular diseases, and aortic aneurism or vascular grafts, immunosuppression or malignancy, pregnancy, elevated anticardiolipin IgG. Recommendations for these high-risk patients after acute Q fever vary from clinical and serological follow-up to combined prolonged antimicrobial therapy, mostly with doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine. Retrospective studies involving a few dozen patients have found this treatment to significantly reduce the rates of endocarditis in patients with significant valvular abnormalities and in reducing obstetric complications in pregnant women. There is no data regarding antimicrobial prophylaxis and vascular graft infections or in patients with aortic aneurysms or malignancy; thus, some experts recommend prophylactic antimicrobial therapy in these patients as well. This paper reviews the current literature regarding the risk factors for persistent localized infection, and the efficacy of prolonged antimicrobial therapy after acute Q fever in these populations. In conclusion, risk factors for a persistent focalized infection, along with risk factors for side effects associated with prolonged antimicrobial therapy, should be taken into consideration and discussed with the patient to help the clinician decide about antimicrobial prophylaxis after acute Q fever.
PUBMED_42781137	PubMed	2026	Adipose tissue ceramides: emerging lipid components of extracellular vesicles and their influence on metabolic dysregulation. Adipose tissue dysfunction is at the interphase between obesity and impaired metabolic health. Increased lipid spillover is a key mechanism by which adipose tissue dysfunction contributes to systemic metabolic dysregulation. This, in turn, leads to the accumulation of lipotoxic lipid species, such as ceramides, within metabolically active tissue not suited for lipid storage tissues thereby fueling insulin resistance. However, the buildup of ceramides also occurs in the adipose tissue of individuals with obesity where these sphingolipids may disrupt energy metabolism, insulin sensitivity and affect adipose tissue secretome, compromising systemic metabolic health. This review will provide an updated overview on the contribution of ceramides to adipose tissue dysfunction, with a particular focus on the onset of insulin resistance. Additionally, this manuscript will focus on the involvement of ceramides in modulating extracellular vesicle (EVs) secretion from the white adipose tissue and their role as bioactive components of EV lipidome able to discern individuals based on their metabolic status.
PUBMED_42717400	PubMed	2026	Adjuvant Antibacterial Effects of Mouriri Elliptica Against Clinical Multidrug Resistant Gram-Negative Bacterial Strains. Bacterial resistance to antibiotics represents a critical global health challenge, demanding urgent alternative strategies to manage infections caused by multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogens such as Acinetobacter baumannii, Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella pneumoniae. A promising approach to address this problem involves the use of combination therapies, in which plant-derived natural products represent an important reservoir of bioactive compounds with the potential to act as effective adjuvants, restoring or enhancing antibiotic efficacy. In this study, the ethanolic extract of Mouriri elliptica (EME) leaves was investigated for its antimicrobial and synergistic potential. EME showed moderate inhibitory activity against both standard and MDR strains, with the most significant effect against A. baumannii (MIC 78.1-312.5 g/mL). Synergistic interactions were observed with conventional antibiotics, particularly ciprofloxacin against K. pneumoniae, reducing MIC values up to fifteen-fold, and with ampicillin against E. coli and S. aureus. The extract also inhibited biofilm formation, with 68% inhibition for E. coli at 500 g/mL and 72.04% for S. aureus at 250 g/mL, with atomic force microscopy images corroborating these findings. LC-MS profiling identified 41 compounds, including chlorogenic acid derivatives, flavonoids, ellagic acid derivatives, and triterpenes. Acute toxicity evaluation in mice at 2000 mg/kg revealed no adverse effects. Collectively, these findings support the potential of M. elliptica as a natural antibacterial adjuvant for enhancing the effectiveness of selected antibiotics against MDR pathogens, warranting further chemical, mechanistic, and in vivo investigation.
PUBMED_42717435	PubMed	2026	Advances in mosquito gut microbiota: Mechanisms of regulating pathogen transmission and applications in vector control. Mosquito-borne diseases pose a threat to global public health, yet traditional control measures are constrained by insecticide resistance and vaccine development bottlenecks. The gut microbiota-mediated transmission-blocking strategy has emerged as a promising alternative. This review summarizes three symbiont mechanisms: direct pathogen inhibition, host immunomodulation, and metabolic niche competition. We highlight research progress and field efficacy of three technical routes: Wolbachia-based population replacement and suppression, paratransgenesis using engineered symbionts, and deployment of natural probiotics. In large-scale field trials, this strategy achieved a 77.1% reduction in dengue incidence and an 86.2% reduction in dengue-related hospitalizations. We analyze constraints including temperature sensitivity, viral evolutionary escape, and ecological safety risks, and propose future directions emphasizing multi-strategy synergy, multi-effector engineered symbionts, and artificial intelligence (AI)-assisted precision interventions. Aligned with the One Health framework, this microbiota-based paradigm offers a foundation for sustainable mosquito-borne disease control, although large-scale implementation depends on resolving regulatory, ecological-safety, and scalability challenges.
PUBMED_42723555	PubMed	2026	Advantages of a Two-Stage Randomized Trial Design to Evaluate Antimicrobial Treatment Strategies: a Simulation Study. Antimicrobial prescribing policies affect treated patients and, through altered transmission, their contacts. Two-stage randomized (2SR) designs can estimate these spillover effects but have not been applied to antimicrobial strategies. We built a stochastic agent-based model of a hospital ward with two competing strains (susceptible and resistant) to emulate a 2SR trial. Drug A covers only the susceptible strain, while Drug B covers both. Six clusters were randomized to a 90/10 or 50/50 Drug A/Drug B allocation, with individuals randomized to treatments within clusters. We estimated direct, indirect, total, and overall effects on mortality. Drug A recipients had higher mortality than Drug B recipients in every cluster, because Drug A does not cover the resistant strain (direct effect +4.75 to +7.08 percentage points pp ). Among Drug A recipients, mortality was higher when the ward followed 90/10 than 50/50 (indirect effect +2.10 pp), driven by higher resistant-strain prevalence; the effect on Drug B recipients was minimal. The 50/50 strategy reduced total mortality (overall effect -4.00 pp), but this concealed a redistribution: resistant-strain deaths fell while susceptible-strain deaths rose. Findings were robust across sensitivity scenarios. The 2SR design captures spillover effects invisible to individually randomized trials.
PUBMED_42765098	PubMed	2026	African swine fever in the era of global expansion: Epidemiology, transmission dynamics, viral evolution, and One Health control strategies.
PUBMED_42676665	PubMed	2026	Air pollution across One Health domains.
PUBMED_42676501	PubMed	2026	Alignment of India's frontline One Health field epidemiology programme with the COHFE framework: a systematic curriculum mapping study. BACKGROUND: The Competencies for One Health Field Epidemiology (COHFE) framework provides global standards for One Health field epidemiology training. India's National Centre for Disease Control in collaboration with the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying developed the Field Epidemiology Programme in One Health (FEP OH), a three-month frontline training program. This study systematically assessed its curriculum alignment with the COHFE framework competencies to identify strengths and gaps. METHODS: All 448 COHFE frontline competencies across 14 domains were systematically mapped against the FEP OH curriculum materials. Coverage was classified as covered, partially covered, or not covered through expert review and consensus validation involving program faculty and technical experts. Descriptive analyses examined coverage patterns by domain, sector-core category, and competency type. RESULTS: Overall, 61.3% of competencies had at least some coverage (35.0% covered, 26.3% partially covered). COHFE One Health Core competencies showed strong alignment (82.8% coverage). Technical domains demonstrated variable coverage: data management and biostatistics (95.5%), field investigations (86.5%), surveillance systems (83.3%), and epidemiologic studies (78.8%) showed strong alignment, while ecosystem health (45.2%) and disease management (42.2%) had coverage gaps. Functional domains revealed marked disparities: communication (88.2%) had better coverage than training (20.0%) and ethics (17.1%). Sector-specific competencies showed lower alignment: public health (38.9%), animal health (35.7%), and environment (25.0%) than One Health competencies. CONCLUSION: This first global assessment of frontline One Health field epidemiology training against the COHFE framework demonstrates strong curriculum alignment of core multisectoral competencies but identifies critical coverage gaps in functional domains and sector-specific competencies. Findings provide an evidence-based roadmap for curriculum enhancement and offer a replicable methodology for other programs seeking to inform curriculum enhancement to support One Health workforce capacity.
PUBMED_42713429	PubMed	2026	Alopecia management from a comparative perspective: pharmacological and pharmaceutical insights in humans, dogs, and cats. Hair loss (alopecia) is a multifactorial condition affecting humans and companion animals, including dogs and cats, with etiologies involving hormonal, immune-mediated, genetic, infectious, allergic, parasitic, and behavioral mechanisms. Although androgenetic alopecia and alopecia areata are well characterized in humans, alopecia in veterinary patients more frequently reflects an underlying endocrine, hereditary, infectious, allergic, parasitic, or self-induced disorder. This review provides a comparative analysis of the pathophysiology, clinical presentation, pharmacological management, and pharmaceutical formulation of nonscarring alopecia across species. In humans, United States Food and Drug Administration-approved treatments, including topical minoxidil, oral finasteride, and selected Janus kinase inhibitors, are supplemented by emerging approaches such as platelet-rich plasma, low-level laser therapy, regenerative medicine, and nanotechnology-based delivery systems. In contrast, veterinary management primarily depends on identification and correction of the underlying disorder, with limited species-specific evidence and few dedicated formulations. Differences in follicular architecture, hair-cycle kinetics, skin permeability, drug metabolism, coat characteristics, and grooming behavior preclude direct extrapolation of human therapies to dogs and cats. Dermatophytosis further illustrates the One Health relevance of comparative alopecia management because successful control may require coordinated treatment of affected animals and humans together with environmental decontamination. This review highlights the need for species-specific clinical trials, safety assessment, and formulation strategies to support the development of effective and practical treatments for human and veterinary alopecia.
PUBMED_42767353	PubMed	2026	Alterations in the gut resistomes of endangered wild equids associated with anthropogenic activities: Insights for One Health surveillance. Antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) are emerging environmental contaminants, but how human-associated management practices are associated with mobile resistomes in endangered wildlife remains poorly resolved. Here, we used fecal metagenomics to compare Przewalski's horses, Mongolian khulans, and domestic horses from Xinjiang, China, including Przewalski's horses from a protected area and a captive-breeding setting under human management. Across 47 fecal metagenomes, we identified 380 ARG subtypes, 23 metal resistance gene (MRG) types, and 26 mobile genetic element (MGE) subtypes. Przewalski's horses and domestic horses carried higher ARG burdens than Mongolian khulans, whereas Mongolian khulans showed a higher MRG burden. Within Przewalski's horses, captive individuals had higher ARG and MGE loads than protected-area individuals, with enrichment of tet(W), lnu(C), vanYG1, transposase genes, and IS91. Co-occurrence networks and structural equation modeling indicated that the captive management setting was positively associated with IS91, which in turn was linked to ARG enrichment and ARG-MRG co-occurrence. Genome-resolved analysis recovered 590 medium- to high-quality metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) and revealed that MAGs co-carrying ARGs, MRGs, and MGEs were predominantly assigned to anaerobic gut genera, including Prevotella, Alloprevotella, Cryptobacteroides, and Limivicinus. These findings suggest that human-associated wildlife habitats are associated with increased mobility potential of gut resistomes through the enrichment of MGEs and resistance carrying host bacteria. Endangered equids may therefore act as sentinels for AMR reservoirs at wildlife-human-environment interfaces, supporting ARG and MGE monitoring in protected-area and captive management programs.
PUBMED_42676261	PubMed	2026	Alveolar echinococcosis. PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Alveolar echinococcosis is a wildlife zoonotic disease. Clinically and radiologically, it presents in a manner similar to hepatic malignancy. The aim of our review is to summarize the current standard of clinical management of alveolar echinococcosis. We also want to raise awareness and promote an integrated approach for this neglected tropical disease (NTD). RECENT FINDINGS: Data suggest increased prevalence of alveolar echinococcosis in some parts of the world. This may be due to intensified surveillance, spread of the disease, decreasing control efforts or a combination of these. Development of new diagnostics and treatment modalities is very slow, constrained by lack of investment into research. SUMMARY: Treatment options for alveolar echinococcosis have not changed in decades. Cure is only available for early and limited hepatic disease amenable to R0-surgical resection. Advanced disease, ineligible for surgery, is treated with benzimidazoles with a parasitostatic effect on Echinococcus multilocularis. The prognosis of alveolar echinococcosis ranges from excellent to poor depending mainly on the extent of hepatopathy induced by irreversible damage to the biliary and vascular system of the liver. Benzimidazole intolerance dramatically worsens prognosis, as parasitic growth cannot be suppressed in inoperable patients.
PUBMED_42770546	PubMed	2026	An Enquiry on the Ethics of One Medicine. One Medicine is not One Health. Although both concepts connect animal and human health, One Health has arguably become a frame for public health. This paper argues that One Medicine uniquely centres on animal and human patients and speaks to the equal interdependence of their health, though it has also (historically) been adopted as a response to the circumstances of living in and with nature. The evolution of One Medicine can be seen as 'jumping together,' or the consilience of ideas and disciplines over time, giving a new sense in theory that unifies previously unconnected phenomena found in nature. Practically, education and oversight can be developed towards its purpose of enhanced clinical and veterinary health care; and just as clinical medicine and public health are related, there is a role for One Medicine to support One Health's focus on the ecological determinants of health. This paper takes the first step towards defining One Medicine's emergent ethical frame, creating space between it and One Health.
PUBMED_42765621	PubMed	2026	An Exploratory One Health Investigation of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Complex at the Camel-Human Interface in Abu Dhabi Emirate, United Arab Emirates. This exploratory cross-sectional One Health study characterized LIODetect TB-ST antibody reactivity in dromedary camels and abattoir workers in Abu Dhabi Emirate and investigated tuberculosis-compatible lesions in slaughtered camels. Sera from 356 camels sampled from farms and livestock holdings (izbas), 393 camels presented for slaughter at Al Bawadi Abattoir, and 86 abattoir workers were screened with LIODetect TB-ST. All 25 LIODetect-reactive slaughtered camels underwent detailed postmortem examination; nonreactive slaughtered camels were not examined postmortem. Lesions identified in two reactive camels were evaluated by histopathology, Ziehl-Neelsen staining, and IS6110 polymerase chain reaction (PCR). LIODetect reactivity was detected in 33/356 field camels (9.3%, 95% CI: 6.5%-12.8%), 25/393 slaughtered camels (6.4%, 95% CI: 4.2%-9.2%), and 3/86 workers (3.5%, 95% CI: 0.7%-9.9%). No recorded characteristic was associated with reactivity among field camels. Among slaughtered camels, age group and body condition showed exploratory statistical associations with reactivity, but category-specific estimates were imprecise. Two of the 25 reactive slaughtered camels (8.0%) had granulomatous lymphadenitis with acid-fast bacilli, and lesion tissue from both animals contained IS6110-detectable Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) DNA. LIODetect TB-ST has not been validated for prevalence estimation in dromedaries; therefore, these proportions describe assay reactivity rather than true infection prevalence. Because postmortem examination was restricted to reactive animals, the 2/25 finding cannot estimate lesion prevalence, false-negative frequency, or positive predictive value. The three reactive workers represent an occupational-health surveillance signal, not evidence of active tuberculosis or camel-to-human transmission. Systematic meat inspection, validated camel diagnostics, culture and species-level molecular characterization, traceable animal movements, and linked veterinary and occupational-health surveillance are needed.
PUBMED_42785969	PubMed	2026	An Updated Checklist and Narrative Review of Helminth Parasites of Terrestrial and Semiaquatic Carnivorous Mammals in Uzbekistan. BACKGROUND: Helminth parasites are critical components of biodiversity and influence the health of both wild and domestic carnivorous mammals. Despite their ecological and public health importance, comprehensive data on helminth diversity in Uzbekistan remain fragmented. This study delivers a thorough and updated synthesis of helminth parasites infecting 15 species of terrestrial and semi-aquatic carnivorous mammals in Uzbekistan. METHODS: This study was designed as an updated checklist and narrative review rather than a formal systematic review or meta-analysis. A total of 120 documents published between 1926 and 2024 were reviewed, including 61 journal articles, 54 national conference abstracts and 5 PhD theses written in Russian, Uzbek and English. Data were obtained from PubMed, ResearchGate, Google Scholar and local archival sources. Parasite and host nomenclatures were updated using internationally recognized taxonomic databases and recent parasitological references. RESULTS: The review identified 74 helminth species, including 9 trematodes, 24 cestodes, 5 acanthocephalans and 36 nematodes, recorded from 15 carnivorous mammal species belonging to the families Canidae, Felidae and Mustelidae. Among these parasites, 37 species (50.0%) were retained as having zoonotic relevance after reassessment, although their public health importance varies from well-established zoonoses to occasional or accidental human infections. Research efforts were strongly biased toward domestic dogs, jackals and foxes, while several host taxa and geographic regions remain poorly investigated. CONCLUSION: This review highlights the rich but unevenly documented helminth diversity of carnivorous mammals in Uzbekistan and provides a taxonomically updated baseline for future regional studies. Persistent gaps in host coverage, geographic sampling, molecular identification and zoonotic risk assessment limit current understanding. Future research should prioritize representative sampling, inclusion of poorly studied carnivore taxa, molecular and non-invasive diagnostic approaches and integrated One Health surveillance to better assess parasite biodiversity, wildlife health and public health risks in Uzbekistan and Central Asia.
PUBMED_42756636	PubMed	2026	An integrated One Health surveillance on cyclosporiasis outbreaks in the United States.
PUBMED_42782459	PubMed	2026	An integrated adaptive framework for mycotoxin management in African cereals: evidence from a scoping review. Mycotoxins threaten food safety, public health, and trade in Africa, where cereals are staple foods largely produced and consumed through informal systems. This scoping review synthesizes evidence on pre- and post-harvest mycotoxin management in African cereal systems and translates it into an integrated adaptive framework for policy and practice. A structured literature search conducted in Google Scholar, Web of Science, and Scopus identified 9,817 records, of which 33 primary studies met the eligibility criteria. The included studies covered interventions across the cereal value chain, including biocontrol, chemical pest management, drying, storage, and processing practices. Biocontrol interventions, particularly atoxigenic Aspergillus flavus products such as Aflasafe reduced aflatoxin levels by 60-100% across the reviewed studies, with long-term field evidence showing that more than 95% of treated grains remained below 20 g/kg in Nigeria and 75% below 4 g/kg in Senegal. Bt maize also reduced fumonisin contamination by approximately 74% in South Africa. Post-harvest interventions, including improved drying, hermetic storage, sorting, and HACCP-based processing, achieved variable but substantial reductions, with hand sorting reducing aflatoxin B1 and fumonisin B1 to less than 6% and 5% of initial levels, respectively, and HACCP-based processing reducing aflatoxins to below 5 g/kg. However, persistent constraints, including climate variability, limited infrastructure, low awareness, gender inequities, informal market dominance, and fragmented regulatory frameworks, continue to limit large-scale effectiveness. These findings informed an Integrated Adaptive Mycotoxin Management Framework grounded in a One Health perspective to support sustainable mycotoxin risk reduction in African cereals.
PUBMED_42713744	PubMed	2026	An integrated model for predicting the response, selectivity, and response/recovery time of composite gas sensors. While composite gas sensors of high response, good selectivity, and fast response/recovery may be fabricated by synergistic coupling of the constituents and spillover effect, systematic design of the composite materials is still a challenge due to the lack of a quantitative model. In this work, an integrated theoretical model for n-type mixed and hierarchical composite gas sensors is developed by combining equivalent-circuit analysis, time-dependent adsorption/desorption kinetics, and spillover effects. This integrated model enables quantitative prediction of the composition-dependent gas response, selectivity, and response/recovery time from constituent-level transport, sensing, and effective kinetic parameters. The calculated performance is evaluated against reported experimental data from representative mixed and hierarchical composite materials and captures the broad composition-dependent trends observed at the reported compositions. The model shows that mixed and hierarchical composites follow different response-enhancement rules because of their distinct conduction structures. In mixed composites, response enhancement can occur under both 1 2 and 1 2 conditions, whereas in hierarchical composites, strong enhancement is more favorable when the coating material effectively participates in macroscopic conductance modulation. These results provide a quantitative basis for designing composite gas sensors with balanced response, selectivity, and sensing kinetics.
PUBMED_42707635	PubMed	2026	An investigation of per- and polyfluoroalkyl concentrations in dogs and cats with endocrine disorders. INTRODUCTION: Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are persistent environmental contaminants with endocrine-disrupting and potential carcinogenic effects in humans. Data on PFAS exposure in companion animals are limited. This study quantified PFAS concentrations in dog and cat serum and investigated associations with endocrine disorders. METHODS: This retrospective study included 179 dogs from the Universities of Bologna and Utrecht, and 84 cats from the University of Bologna, sampled between 2021 and 2025. The population comprised 23 healthy dogs, 35 healthy cats, and animals with endocrine disorders, including 49 cats with hyperthyroidism, 64 dogs with pituitary-dependent hypercortisolism, 16 with primary hyperparathyroidism, and 85 with adrenal tumors. Eleven PFAS were measured by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Between-group differences were evaluated using nonparametric tests, associations with disease status using age-adjusted generalized linear models, and correlations with age and body condition score using Spearman's rank correlation. RESULTS: Eight PFAS were detected in dogs and nine in cats. The most frequently detected compounds were perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS, 99.5%), perfluorohexanesulfonic acid (PFHxS, 69.0%), and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA, 68.5%) in dogs, and PFOS (99.0%) and PFOA (96.0%) in cats. Dogs from Utrecht had higher PFOS concentrations than dogs from Bologna. Unadjusted between-group differences varied by species, with higher PFAS concentrations in healthy cats but higher concentrations of some PFAS in certain canine diseased groups. After adjustment for age, no PFAS was independently associated with disease status in either species. A weak negative correlation between PFAS and age was observed in dogs (r -0.206, p 0.005) and cats (r -0.234, p 0.032), and diseased animals were older than healthy controls, suggesting that age contributed to the observed between-group differences. No significant associations were found with body condition score. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS: PFAS exposure was widespread in both species, with higher PFOS concentrations in dogs from the Dutch cohort. The inverse association between PFAS concentrations and age, together with the older age of diseased animals, suggests that age substantially contributed to the observed between-group differences. Further longitudinal studies, including minimally exposed control populations, are warranted to clarify the health implications of PFAS exposure in companion animals.
PUBMED_42757725	PubMed	2026	Anaerobic bacteria: a neglected reservoir of mobile oxazolidinone resistance genes. Oxazolidinones are critical last-resort antimicrobials against severe infections caused by Gram-positive bacteria, whereas mobile oxazolidinone resistance genes (MORGs, including cfr, optrA, poxtA) severely compromise their clinical efficacy. To date, most surveillance and mechanistic studies focusing on MORGs have focused on aerobic pathogens, while anaerobic commensal and opportunistic bacteria are largely overlooked as hidden resistance reservoirs, leading to critical knowledge gaps under the One Health framework. Here, we identified six MORG-carrying anaerobic gut bacteria belonging to four distinct genera. Notably, this is the first report on the identification of cfr (B) in Gram-negative bacteria and optrA in three previously unreported host species. Genomic dissection further confirmed diverse mobile genetic elements driving horizontal dissemination of MORGs across phylogenetically distant anaerobes. Multiple additional resistance genes coexisted with MORGs in these gut anaerobes. Our findings demonstrate that intestinal anaerobic bacteria constitute a neglected critical reservoir for clinically vital MORGs, highlighting an urgent need for strengthened antimicrobial resistance surveillance of anaerobes across animal and human hosts.
PUBMED_42770873	PubMed	2026	Andrographolide Inhibits Rabies Virus Replication. Rabies is a fatal zoonotic disease caused by infection with the rabies virus (RABV). Anti-RABV serum or antibody is a unique treatment for patients infected by RABV. However, the mortality is almost 100% in the underdeveloped regions due to the high price and the high cost of transportation and preservation of anti-RABV serum or antibody. Therefore, it is urgently needed to develop novel therapies that can effectively fight against RABV infection. Andrographolide (Andro) is a labdane diterpenoid isolated from Andrographis paniculate, which has been used to treat bacterial and viral infections for decades. In this study, we found that Andro dose-dependently inhibited RABV replication in host cells, with a half-maximal effective concentration (EC50) of slightly less than 60 mol/L. The antiviral effects of Andro were independent of viral strains and cell lines. Pretreatment of RABV with Andro in test tubes for 1 h did not affect virus replication in host cells, implying that Andro did not directly reduce RABV viability. Of interest, Andro treatment showed no influence on either RABV binding to cells or RABV invasion of cells. Also, Andro treatment downregulated the expression of RABV genomic RNA and structural genes in the cells. To investigate the therapeutic efficacy of Andro in vivo, mice were administered Andro via intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection or intragastric (i.g.) gavage. Neither the administration route nor the dosage significantly affected body weight. Notably, Andro protected mice against a lethal challenge with RABV strain challenge virus standard 11 (CVS-11). Specifically, i.p. injection of 100 mg/kg and 1 mg/kg Andro increased survival rates from 20% to 60% and 80%, respectively, while i.g. gavage of 250 mg/kg Andro elevated the survival rate from 30% to 60%. Correspondingly, RABV viral loads in mouse brain tissues were also reduced. The results suggest that Andro has great potential as a novel anti-RABV agent for the treatment of rabies.
PUBMED_42674629	PubMed	2026	Anomalies of Net Primary Productivity under Compound Marine Heatwaves and Microplastics. Marine heatwaves (MHW) and microplastics (MPs) pollution increasingly co-occur, yet the response of phytoplankton net primary production (NPP) to this compound condition remains incompletely characterized, in part because analyses confined to local conditions may overlook nonlocal influences. Here we developed an adaptive machine learning framework to evaluate global NPP anomalies under co-occurring MHW and MPs. The results indicate that comparable compound-stress regimes corresponded to divergent NPP outcomes depending on regional nutrient backgrounds: an anomalous increase coincided with nitrate replenishment in oligotrophic waters, whereas an anomalous decrease coincided with silicate accumulation in iron-limited, diatom-dominated waters. Furthermore, pronounced NPP anomalies frequently exhibited a geographic offset from heatwave cores, a spatial mismatch consistent with a shock-transmission-spillover (STS) framework, here interpreted as a spatial teleconnection between the thermal forcing and the ecological response. Pending in situ validation, these observed associations indicate that monitoring confined to thermal or pollution sources may misplace ecological risk. Consequently, these findings support a shift toward downstream monitoring along current pathways relevant to fisheries and carbon uptake.
PUBMED_42755973	PubMed	2026	Antibiotic residues and antimicrobial resistance patterns of bacteria isolated from beef at Ruti Rufura Slaughterhouse, southwestern Uganda. BACKGROUND: Antimicrobial use in livestock contributes to the emergence of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria and the persistence of antimicrobial residues in foods of animal origin. The coexistence of antimicrobial residues and resistant bacteria in beef poses a major food safety and public health concern. However, data on these hazards in Uganda remain limited. This study assessed antibiotic residues and antimicrobial resistance among bacteria isolated from beef marketed in southwestern Uganda. METHODS: A cross-sectional laboratory-based study was conducted from May to August 2025 using beef samples from 92 randomly selected cattle carcasses at Ruti Rufura Slaughterhouse, Mbarara City, Uganda. Antibiotic residues were screened by agar well diffusion and confirmed for penicillin and oxytetracycline using thin-layer chromatography. Bacterial isolates were identified using standard microbiological methods, and antimicrobial susceptibility was determined by the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion method according to CLSI guidelines. RESULTS: Antibiotic residues were detected in 86/92 (93.5%) samples. Thin-layer chromatography confirmed penicillin residues in 84 (97.7%) and oxytetracycline residues in 71 (82.6%) samples, with 73.1% containing both antibiotics. A total of 125 bacterial isolates representing seven genera were recovered, predominantly Proteus spp. (30.4%), Citrobacter spp. (26.4%), and Escherichia coli (16.8%). Among 75 viable isolates, resistance was highest to ampicillin (97.3%), chloramphenicol (86.7%), tetracycline (82.7%), ceftriaxone (57.3%), and ciprofloxacin (54.7%), while gentamicin showed the highest susceptibility (86.7%). Oxytetracycline residues were significantly associated with tetracycline resistance and penicillin residues with ampicillin resistance (both P 0.001). CONCLUSION: Beef marketed in southwestern Uganda frequently contains antimicrobial residues and antimicrobial-resistant bacteria, posing a potential food safety risk. Strengthened antimicrobial stewardship, enforcement of withdrawal periods, and integrated surveillance of antimicrobial residues and resistance in foods of animal origin are needed to support One Health efforts against antimicrobial resistance.
PUBMED_42685365	PubMed	2026	Antigen-specific antibody responses following tuberculin administration in clinically healthy camelids. Serological assays are used alongside tuberculin skin testing to improve detection of bovine tuberculosis (bTB) in camelids. Tuberculin-induced anamnestic antibody responses have been described in infected animals; however, the effect of single and repeated tuberculin exposure on antigen-specific antibody responses in clinically healthy, tuberculosis-free camelids has not been evaluated. A retrospective observational study was undertaken involving alpacas and llamas subjected to voluntary or regulatory tuberculin administration, including single or repeated injections within 12 months before serological testing using the Camelid Enferplex multiplex ELISA. Animals were clinically healthy and originated from herds with no credible suspicion or history of bTB before or after testing. An unprimed control cohort from a biosecure, tuberculosis-free herd was included for comparison. Serological reactors underwent statutory post-mortem examination. Camelids exposed to tuberculin demonstrated consistent antibody reactivity to a defined subset of antigens, in the assay-reported order: MPB70-derived peptide (MPB70pep), bovine purified protein derivative (PPDB), MPB83, CFP-10 and MPB70. This pattern occurred in clinically healthy animals with no epidemiological risk factors or clinical, pathological or bacteriological evidence of Mycobacterium bovis infection at post-mortem examination. Nevertheless, ten animals were classified as serological reactors and compulsorily removed under regulatory provisions. In contrast, unprimed control animals showed no persistent multi-antigen antibody reactivity. Tuberculin administration alone, including repeated exposure within 12 months, can induce patterned antibody responses detectable by the Camelid Enferplex assay independent of infection. In low-prevalence spillover species, such responses may have important regulatory and welfare consequences, highlighting the need to consider tuberculin exposure history, herd biosecurity, herd disease status and species-specific immunology when interpreting serological results.
PUBMED_42750254	PubMed	2026	Antimicrobial Resistance in Nontyphoidal Salmonella and Clinically Relevant Enterococcus From Faecal Samples of Conservation-Priority Captive Ungulates in a United Arab Emirates Urban Zoo: A Cross-Sectional Baseline Study. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a One Health challenge driven by microbial exchange among humans, animals and the environment. Zoological institutions offer useful settings for environmental AMR surveillance. This single-zoo cross-sectional study examined the occurrence, antimicrobial susceptibility and genomic characteristics of nontyphoidal Salmonella enterica (NTS) and clinically relevant Enterococcus spp. in faecal samples from 101 clinically healthy captive ungulates representing seven conservation-priority species at a major urban zoo in the United Arab Emirates. NTS was detected in 4/101 samples (3.9%), including serovars Schwarzengrund (n 2), Kentucky (n 1) and Chester (n 1). Among the four recovered NTS isolates, all met the study MDR definition within the tested panel, including a Salmonella Kentucky ST198 isolate carrying multiple resistance genes and quinolone-associated mutations. Enterococcus spp. were detected in 77/101 samples (76.2%), dominated by Enterococcus faecium and Enterococcus casseliflavus (each 41.5%). Among 33 E. faecium/Enterococcus faecalis isolates tested phenotypically, resistance was generally low, with erythromycin and ciprofloxacin resistance each observed in 9.1%. One clinically important E. faecium isolate showed glycopeptide resistance and genetic markers associated with reduced daptomycin susceptibility. These single-institution cross-sectional data provide an initial regional baseline for AMR-relevant enteric bacteria in conservation-managed ungulates and identify priorities for broader longitudinal and interface-based surveillance.
PUBMED_42704659	PubMed	2026	Antimicrobial resistance in wastewater-impacted coastal waters: implications for environmental surveillance and public health. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a global public health concern, and wastewater-impacted aquatic environments are recognized as reservoirs and dissemination pathways for antimicrobial-resistant bacteria (ARB) and genes (ARGs). However, harmonized environmental AMR surveillance frameworks that integrate culture-based ARB enumeration with molecular ARG monitoring across wastewater and receiving surface waters remain limited. This pilot study, conducted in Ireland as part of a European harmonized monitoring initiative, assessed ARB and ARG abundances in wastewaters and surface waters. Wastewater treatment plant influent (n 3), effluent (n 3) and surface waters upstream and downstream of the discharge point (n 3 each) were sampled on three occasions in late 2024. Culture-based methods enumerated total and extended-spectrum -lactamase (ESBL)-producing Escherichia coli, while quantitative real-time PCR quantified 16S rRNA and five AMR-associated genes (intI1, ermB, aadA1, bla CTX-M-1 and vanA). Total E. coli concentrations were highest in influent ( 105-106 c.f.u. dl-1), decreased in effluent ( 103-105 c.f.u. dl-1) and lowest in surface waters ( 10 -10 c.f.u. dl-1). ESBL-producing E. coli were consistently detected in influent ( 104 c.f.u. dl-1) and effluent ( 101-103 c.f.u. dl-1) but were not recovered from seawater. ARG abundances were highest in influent, reaching up to 1011 copies dl-1 for intl1, remained elevated in effluent (up to 1010 copies dl-1) and were 2-3 orders of magnitude lower in surface waters relative to effluent. Downstream seawater exhibited higher ARG levels than upstream freshwater despite low culturable E. coli. Peak ARG concentrations in effluent and surface waters were observed following a period of heavy rainfall; however, the limited number of sampling events precluded assessment of any statistical association. These findings highlight the impact of wastewater discharges on environmental AMR dissemination and suggest that faecal indicator-based monitoring may underestimate emerging risks, supporting integration of AMR indicators into EU water quality frameworks.
PUBMED_42742343	PubMed	2026	Antioxidant defenses of Francisella tularensis perturb Aim2 inflammasome activation. Francisella tularensis is a gram-negative bacterium that causes tularemia, a fatal zoonotic disease. F. tularensis has been used in the bioweapon programs of several countries. Its potential use as a bioterrorism agent led the CDC to classify F. tularensis as a Tier 1 Select Agent. The cytosolic sensor absent in melanoma 2 (Aim2) detects double-stranded DNA in the cytosol of infected cells and subsequently assembles a multiprotein complex known as the inflammasome. Inflammasome activation drives the secretion of IL-1 and IL-18, key pro-inflammatory cytokines required for controlling F. tularensis infection. Prior studies have shown that F. tularensis actively suppresses Aim2 inflammasome activation; however, the underlying mechanism remains unknown. We hypothesized that F. tularensis suppresses Aim2-mediated responses by modulating the intracellular redox environment. We utilized an F. tularensis live vaccine strain (LVS) mutant lacking OxyR ( oxyR), a transcriptional regulator that controls the expression of major antioxidant enzymes. Our results show that macrophages infected with the oxyR mutant exhibit significantly higher levels of Aim2-dependent caspase-1 and IL-1 than those infected with wild-type bacteria. The expression of interferon regulatory factor 1 and the guanylate-binding proteins GBP2 and GBP5, upstream signaling components of the Aim2 inflammasome, is markedly higher in oxyR-infected macrophages than in controls. These changes were absent in oxyR-infected NADPH oxidase-deficient macrophages, which are unable to generate reactive oxygen species. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that the macrophage redox environment plays a key role in activating the Aim2 inflammasome. This work advances understanding of how F. tularensis-encoded factors subvert host innate immune defenses.
PUBMED_42784344	PubMed	2026	Application of Genomics to Prevent and Combat Emerging Infectious Disease Threats in Latin America: Perspectives from an Overseas U.S. Navy Research Command. Endemic and (re)emerging infectious diseases pose a major threat to public health and military readiness in Central and South America. The high biodiversity and the differing transmission pathways require the use of highly sensitive methods to track the emergence and spread of these diseases. High-throughput sequencing technologies have become a critical resource for the field of infectious disease monitoring, specifically for tracking pathogen evolution, antimicrobial resistance, and transmission. This review provides an overview of the implementation of genomics-informed infectious disease surveillance conducted by the U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit SOUTH, focusing on operational, infrastructural, and logistical challenges in resource-limited settings and outlining strategies for building sustainable regional capacity. Selected case studies focused on prominent biothreats including dengue, Oropouche, malaria, and antimicrobial resistance demonstrate the significance and applicability of targeted and agnostic sequencing approaches to elucidate transmission pathways, pathogen discovery, and guide public health responses and field-deployable applications.
PUBMED_42765625	PubMed	2026	Aquaculture-driven antibiotic pollution - a critical and emerging threat to maritime health. The rapid growth of global aquaculture poses significant environmental challenges, particularly through the release of antibiotic residues and antimicrobial-resistant bacteria (ARB) into coastal ecosystems. Intensive aquaculture systems, especially in Southeast Asia, frequently use antibiotics to manage infections in farmed species, leading to persistent pollutant discharge into marine environments, where antibiotic residues have been detected at environmentally relevant concentrations ranging from ng L to low g L levels. This study underscores the urgent need for scientific and policy attention to address the intersection of aquaculture practices, environmental pollution, and public health risks associated with antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Research highlights the alarming proliferation of AMR in aquaculture-related bacteria, with quantitative evidence indicating resistance levels exceeding 50% for approximately one-third of antimicrobial compounds tested across Asia, exacerbated by the presence of microplastics which facilitate the transfer and accumulation of resistance genes among bacterial communities. Rising marine temperatures further enhance this challenge, correlating with increased levels of resistance in both aquaculture and clinical settings. Current maritime health frameworks inadequately address these risks, potentially transforming coastal areas into reservoirs for resistant bacteria, thereby threatening food safety and public health. This paper advocates for a coordinated, One-Health approach that incorporates systematic monitoring, stricter antibiotic regulations, research into alternative disease control measures, and the inclusion of marine AMR risks in public health policies. By implementing these strategies collaboratively, we can safeguard the health of marine ecosystems and the well-being of communities reliant on them.
PUBMED_42714752	PubMed	2026	Arbovirus co-circulation and epidemiological convergence in a changing climate: challenges for surveillance, diagnosis and public health preparedness. Arboviral diseases are undergoing substantial epidemiological changes driven by climate change, urbanization, global mobility, vector expansion, and evolving ecological conditions. These processes increasingly favor the geographic overlap and co-circulation of multiple arboviruses, including in regions previously considered at limited risk. In this review, we describe this broader process as epidemiological convergence, referring to the progressive overlap of arboviral transmission systems across shared geographic, ecological, vector, host, and public health contexts. Such convergence creates interconnected challenges for clinical recognition, laboratory diagnosis, surveillance, and outbreak response. Diagnostic uncertainty is further amplified by overlapping clinical presentations, serological cross-reactivity, previous arboviral exposure, and co-infections or sequential infections. At the same time, pathogen-specific surveillance systems may inadequately capture increasingly complex transmission patterns, highlighting the need for integrated and interoperable approaches. One Health provides an essential framework for integrating human, animal, vector, and environmental dimensions of arboviral transmission. Complementarily, selected principles derived from Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive (CBRNE) preparedness may strengthen operational coordination, contingency planning, biosafety, risk communication, and response capacity during complex arboviral scenarios. However, their added value in arboviral settings requires further empirical evaluation. Addressing epidemiological convergence will ultimately require adaptable systems linking epidemiological understanding, diagnostic capacity, integrated surveillance, and operational preparedness.
PUBMED_42766254	PubMed	2026	Arthropod-Related Zoonotic Sepsis Caused by Capnocytophaga Canimorsus. Loxosceles spp. bites can occasionally lead to systemic loxoscelism, including hemolysis and severe systemic illness. Secondary bacterial infections after spider bites are rarely reported and usually limited to skin commensals. We describe a patient with violin spider (Loxosceles rufescens) bite complicated by Capnocytophaga canimorsus sepsis, an emerging zoonotic pathogen classically linked to dog and cat bites. Blood cultures confirmed the infection, although subsequent non-viability of the isolate precluded antimicrobial susceptibility testing and genomic characterization. This case highlights diagnostic pitfalls, the under-recognized zoonotic role of arthropods, the need for culture-independent methods and a One Health perspective on antimicrobial resistance.
PUBMED_42713642	PubMed	2026	Assessing Value of Behavioral Interventions: Designing Cost-Effectiveness Analyses for Food-Is-Medicine Interventions. Food-is-Medicine (FIM) interventions, including medically tailored meals, medically tailored groceries, and produce prescriptions, represent a promising approach to prevent, manage, and treat diet-related diseases. As the evidence base for FIM interventions expands through large-scale randomized trials, standardized value assessment frameworks will be essential to inform coverage and reimbursement decisions. Using FIM interventions as examples, this article provides guidance on economic evaluation methods, particularly cost-effectiveness analysis. We further discuss emerging methodological approaches in cost-effectiveness analysis for capturing broader nonhealth impacts of FIM interventions, such as productivity, spillover effects on others, and health equity. We offer methodological and reporting recommendations to improve comparability across economic evaluations of FIM interventions. Finally, we examine coverage challenges in the United States health system to underscore the importance of collaboration among providers, patients, researchers, and policymakers to generate rigorous, decision-relevant evidence on the value of FIM interventions.
PUBMED_42681213	PubMed	2026	Assessing oceans' health through biopsy sampling in free-ranging marine mammals: a systematic review (2014-2024). Marine mammals are ecological sentinels of ocean health. As apex predators, they can bioaccumulate contaminants through aquatic food webs. In this context, this systematic review evaluates the role of minimally invasive biopsy sampling in assessing contaminant exposure across free-ranging populations. Following PRISMA guidelines, 31 studies were evaluated, covering the period from 2014 to 2024, and sourced from the CAPES Periodicals Portal database. Results indicate a primary focus on persistent organic pollutants (POPs; 74.19%), such as PCBs and DDTs, with a notable geographic bias toward cetaceans in the Northern Hemisphere (47.4% in the Americas). Cetaceans, especially bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus), were significantly overrepresented (93.94% of studies), while studies on the Carnivora order, focused on pinnipeds, were scarce (6.06%). Inorganic contaminants were underrepresented, despite concerning mercury levels in dolphins and chromium-induced genotoxicity in fin whales. Interestingly, emerging contaminants, like phthalates, were detected in only two studies. DEHP, a hazardous plasticizer, was detected in three cetacean species. Thus, the urgent need to expand monitoring efforts to underrepresented regions and to integrate biopsy analysis with other approaches (e.g., multi-omics, isotopic analyses), long-term research, and satellite telemetry to map pollution hotspots is emphasized. Standardizing protocols and establishing global biobanks are essential for data harmonization. This work highlights the critical role of biopsies within the One Health framework, connecting marine pollution data to human and ecosystem resilience.
PUBMED_42684534	PubMed	2026	Assessment and tracking of antimicrobial resistance in Escherichia coli as a one health perspective. Genomics has emerged as a powerful tool for addressing the global scenario of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in the world. The chances of strain circulation across diverse ecosystems has led us to understand the situation from one health point of view. The study examined 897 Escherichia coli genomes across healthcare (n 615), veterinary and fisheries (n 219), and environment (n 63) from Gujarat, India, from 2022 to 2025. The genomes were characterized by sequence type (ST), serotype, and phylogroup analysis to identify the dominant clonal lineages. Furthermore, antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) and plasmids were analyzed to understand the movement of horizontal gene transfer (HGT). The putative transmission events across sectors were identified using single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with distance thresholds of 0, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, and 50. We reported the presence of internationally reported dominant clonal lineage ST131-B2-O25:H4 across all settings. The healthcare isolates carried a heavy burden of ARGs than the environment and veterinary and fisheries sectors (median 9 vs. 5 vs. 1 gene per isolate), which is consistent with the use of clinical antimicrobial use exerting the dominant selective pressure in this dataset. Plasmid clustering identified 505 distinct clusters, of which 64 were detected across all three sectors, carrying acquired resistance genes namely mphA, sul1, blaCMY-59, qnrS1, and tetA on predominantly IncF (IA, IB, IC, II) replicons. Resistance genes and mobile genetic elements (IS3, IS5, and IS66) were classified by co-location confidence. Potential transmission events and co-circulation both within and across niches were indicated by overlapping clusters. Genomic clustering and mobility patterns of plasmids identified in the E. coli strains are consistent with the possible clonal and plasmid-mediated spread from healthcare to the veterinary and fisheries and the environment sectors. This study's convenience-based sampling and cross-sectoral design do not establish confirmed or directional transmission. These findings support a One Health framework for AMR surveillance, prioritizing biosecurity, antimicrobial stewardship, and infection prevention and control across sectors.
PUBMED_42744119	PubMed	2026	Assessment of the Antimicrobial Resistance Research Ecosystem in the Caribbean Region. OBJECTIVES: This study assessed the antimicrobial resistance (AMR) research ecosystem across ten low and middle income Caribbean countries (CARICOM 10): Dominica, Haiti, Saint Lucia, Belize, Jamaica, Suriname, Guyana, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Montserrat, and Grenada. METHODS: We performed a bibliometric analysis of AMR publications for the CARICOM 10 countries from 2010 to 2025. Keyword co-occurrence mapping identified major thematic clusters. Co-citation analysis characterized the field's intellectual foundations, while co-authorship analysis assessed collaboration patterns across countries and institutions. Finally, content analysis evaluated the integration of gender and the One Health approach within AMR research. RESULTS: Among 193 retrieved publications, research was heavily concentrated on a limited range of bacterial pathogens, particularly Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli. Among the CARICOM 10, Haiti and Jamaica accounted for the most publications in the academic literature, with substantial co-authorship from the United States. Key thematic gaps included fungal resistance, environmental reservoirs, and broader One Health dimensions. The research ecosystem exhibited strong representation of international partners, predominantly North American and European institutions, highlighting constrained intra-Caribbean research collaboration and limited local leadership. Among the 182 articles with full-text access, only 24% incorporated gender considerations and 20% adopted a One Health approach. CONCLUSIONS: The analysis of AMR research outputs from the CARICOM 10 reveals persistent gaps in geographic coverage and thematic diversity. Despite AMR recognition as a priority, the indexed literature suggests that research outputs remain shaped by extra-regional collaborations and limited local leadership. Strengthening capacity will require coordinated networks, collaboration, and integration of One Health frameworks.
PUBMED_42727874	PubMed	2026	Association of Enterocytozoon bieneusi Infection with chronic/persistent diarrhea and ITS genotypic diversity: a hospital-based case-control study in Suburban Shanghai, China. Enterocytozoon bieneusi is a globally distributed zoonotic enteric pathogen that remains largely overlooked in routine diarrheal disease surveillance. Although previous studies in Shanghai, China, have reported elevated prevalence in diarrheal populations, case-control data from suburban areas at the peri urban interface and the strength of the association between E. bieneusi infection and chronic diarrhea in non-immunocompromised individuals remain poorly characterized. We performed a hospital-based case-control study in suburban Shanghai, enrolling 286 diarrheal outpatients without documented immunodeficiency and 138 asymptomatic controls frequency-matched for age and sex. Fecal specimens were collected and subjected to genomic DNA extraction. E. bieneusi was detected via nested PCR amplification of the ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region. Factors associated with infection were identified using multivariate logistic regression. Genotypic diversity and zoonotic potential were assessed by Sanger sequencing and phylogenetic analysis. The overall prevalence of E. bieneusi was 12.2% (35/286) in diarrheal patients, significantly higher than the 2.2% (3/138) observed in asymptomatic controls (P 0.001). E. bieneusi positivity was independently associated with chronic/persistent diarrhea (adjusted odds ratio 2.63, 95% confidence interval: 1.25-5.54, P 0.011). Fourteen distinct ITS genotypes were identified, comprising five known genotypes (D, EbpD, SHW7, Henan-III, and CHG5) and nine novel genotypes (designated SHH2 to SHH10). Thirteen genotypes clustered within Group 1, and one genotype (CHG5) fell within Group 2, two phylogenetic groups that contain genotypes with documented zoonotic potential in global surveillance. E. bieneusi was detected at a relatively high prevalence among diarrheal patients in suburban Shanghai, and its detection was associated with chronic/persistent diarrhea. The predominance of zoonotic genotypes and the identification of nine novel Group 1 genotypes indicate phylogenetic similarity to known zoonotic lineages and warrant further investigation of local zoonotic transmission; no animal or environmental samples were analyzed in this study. These findings suggest that E. bieneusi testing may be considered as part of the differential diagnosis for patients with unexplained chronic/persistent diarrhea and highlight the need for One Health surveillance in the surveyed area.
PUBMED_42783610	PubMed	2026	Atmospheric Particulate Matter as a Carrier of Pb, Cd, and Ni: From Environmental Transfer and Bioaccessibility to Molecular Toxicity and Predictive Modeling. Atmospheric particulate matter (PM) is a heterogeneous carrier of toxic metals whose environmental fate and biological effects depend on particle size, source-related composition, chemical form, solubility, and bioaccessibility. Lead (Pb), cadmium (Cd), and nickel (Ni) are of particular concern because atmospheric transport and deposition connect air pollution with persistent contamination of soils, vegetation, waters, sediments, food, and feed, followed by human and animal exposure. This review integrates evidence across a source-to-effect continuum encompassing emission, atmospheric transport, deposition, post-depositional redistribution, food-chain transfer, bioaccessibility, toxicokinetics, molecular toxicity, biomonitoring, remediation, and predictive assessment. Total PM mass and total metal concentration do not adequately represent biologically effective exposure, which is additionally determined by respiratory deposition, gastrointestinal release, dissolution kinetics, absorption, tissue distribution, intracellular retention, and interactions with co-associated constituents. Pb, Cd, and Ni share downstream effects including oxidative imbalance, inflammation, mitochondrial dysfunction, DNA damage, impaired genome maintenance, epigenetic remodeling, and cytogenetic abnormalities, but differ in environmental mobility, persistence, target-organ distribution, and molecular mechanisms. Effective risk assessment therefore requires coordinated multi-matrix monitoring, distinction between total and biologically accessible fractions, pathway-specific remediation, and appropriately validated predictive models. An integrated One Health framework can improve identification of priority matrices, exposure pathways, and risk-reduction measures.
PUBMED_42767022	PubMed	2026	Bacterial diversity, antimicrobial resistance profiles, and farm-level risk factors in bovine mastitis: A retrospective cohort study in dairy herds. Bovine mastitis is the costliest infectious disease in dairy farming worldwide and a major driver of antimicrobial use. The increasing prevalence of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in mastitis pathogens has elevated this condition to a One Health perspective. A retrospective analytical observational study was conducted from 540 quarter-milk samples collected from 419 cows across 123 farms collected between June 2023 and January 2026, from dairy cows with clinical or subclinical mastitis. Bacterial identification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing were performed using the Mastatest automated system. Risk factors were assessed using binomial generalized linear mixed models (GLMMs), including dairy farm as a random intercept. Environmental pathogens such as Escherichia coli (25.7%) and Streptococcus uberis (23.7%) were the predominant pathogens identified. Conventional milking, udder alterations, and impaired general condition were associated with higher odds of E. coli isolation, whereas recurrent mastitis was associated with lower odds (all p 0.05). Recurrent mastitis was the only factor significantly associated with S. uberis isolation (p 0.037). Among Gram-positive monobacterial isolates, co-resistance to 2 antibiotic classes was detected in 10.5% overall; Streptococcus spp. showed the highest resistance rates, particularly to cloxacillin (42.9%), benzylpenicillin (25.0%) and macrolides (21.4%). No significant predictors of co-resistance were identified. Antibiotic resistance patterns observed in mastitis pathogens support the implementation of culture-guided antimicrobial therapy and provide baseline data for regional AMR surveillance within a One Health approach.
PUBMED_42698673	PubMed	2026	Baseline of miltefosine resistance markers in zoonotic Leishmania infantum from Eastern Mediterranean dogs prior to widespread drug use. Miltefosine, the only oral antileishmanial drug approved for human use, is increasingly administered in canine leishmaniasis. Reduced susceptibility in Leishmania infantum has been linked to alterations in the miltefosine transporter gene (LMT; LINF 130020800) and deletion of the Miltefosine Sensitivity Locus (MSL) on chromosome 31. We analysed LMT presence and MSL integrity by PCR in 66 L. infantum isolates collected between 1996 and 2012 from dogs with clinical leishmaniasis in endemic areas of Greece, Cyprus and T rkiye. All isolates carried LMT, indicating presence of the PCR target corresponding to the miltefosine transporter gene. In contrast, 13.6% exhibited MSL deletion (targeting LinJ.31.2370), detected in Greek (33.3%) and Cypriot (9.7%) strains, whereas all Turkish strains retained an intact MSL locus. Given the strong association between MSL deletion and miltefosine treatment failure, these pre-drug-pressure findings provide critical baseline data for the Eastern Mediterranean and underscore the need for molecular surveillance within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42674005	PubMed	2026	Bat-rodent-human interfaces in the Americas: a synthesis of zoonotic pathways. Emerging zoonoses often arise at wildlife-human interfaces, yet prevention efforts still treat wildlife reservoirs in isolation. This review synthesizes evidence on RNA viruses detected in bats and rodents across the Americas and examines the ecological interfaces underlying bat-rodent-human transmission. Rather than an exhaustive inventory, we adopt an interface-based perspective on cross-species transmission. We focus on astroviruses, coronaviruses, hantaviruses, and lyssaviruses-groups combining high genetic diversity, broad host ranges, and documented or suspected zoonotic potential. We describe interfaces created by land-use change, urbanization, shared food and water resources, co-roosting in human-made structures, environmental contamination (guano- and urine-borne aerosols), and seasonality of shedding. Key gaps include geographic sampling biases, limited infectivity data, and scarce integration of host movement, contact ecology, and human practices. Prevention priorities include longitudinal surveillance along rural-urban gradients, genomic tracking of cross-species transmission, experimental work on commensal rodents that may bridge bats and humans, and co-designed community interventions. Given the region's exceptional biodiversity and rapid socio-ecological change, the Americas represent a hotspot where bat-rodent-human viral interactions may increase spillover risk. Recognizing and monitoring this overlooked interface can sharpen early warning and inform cost-effective prevention.
PUBMED_42782382	PubMed	2026	Bayesian Parameter Estimation and Stochastic Extinction Analysis in a Seasonal Bubonic Plague Transmission Model. Mathematical models of plague dynamics provide insight into zoonotic transmission processes and epidemic persistence but often neglect stochastic effects and seasonal variability. In this study, we examine how seasonal variability influences zoonotic disease transmission through a rat-flea-human plague model. Periodic environmental forcing modulates rat abundance, flea survival, and biting activity, generating time-dependent rates that capture realistic ecological seasonality. To represent demographic randomness, we formulate a continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC) model and apply a multi-type branching process approximation near the disease-free equilibrium (DFE) to derive approximate disease extinction probabilities using probability generating functions (PGFs) and the backward Kolmogorov differential equation (BKDE). Our results show that random fluctuations can prevent an epidemic outbreak even when the seasonal reproduction number satisfies R 0 1 . We also quantify the spillover probability arising from a single infectious flea, demonstrating that seasonal forcing significantly alters outbreak risk. Along with this, an expression for time to extinction is also derived. To ensure biological understanding, we estimate model parameters from historical data using a Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach implemented via the Delayed Rejection Adaptive Metropolis (DRAM) algorithm. Through this analysis, we highlight the critical role of seasonality in shaping outbreak risk and demonstrate the limitations of relying solely on deterministic models.
PUBMED_42777597	PubMed	2026	Bayesian latent class analysis for evaluating diagnostic performance of three serological tests of bovine brucellosis in Pakistan. Bovine brucellosis is a major zoonotic disease in Pakistan, yet diagnostic tests used in national surveillance have never been validated under field conditions. This cross-sectional study estimated the sensitivity (Se) and specificity (Sp) of three commonly used bovine brucellosis serological tests, viz. Rose Bengal plate test (RBPT), Serum agglutination test (SAT), and indirect ELISA (iELISA), and the true prevalence of the disease in the study area using Bayesian latent class analysis (BLCA). Serum samples from 1000 animals (507 cattle, 493 buffaloes) across four districts (Faisalabad, Jhang, Chiniot and T.T. Singh) were tested in parallel. Since all three assays target antibodies against smooth lipopolysaccharide (S-LPS), full conditional dependence (CD) was modeled, with an acceptable fit attained only under informative priors (posterior predictive p-value 0.250; DIC 211.73). RBPT showed the lowest Se (0.705), while SAT (0.938) and iELISA (0.952) performed substantially better. All three tests achieved high Sp (RBPT 0.977; SAT 0.993; iELISA 0.997). True prevalence ranged from 7.5% (Faisalabad) to 25.3% (Jhang). SAT + iELISA in parallel achieved the highest performance index (PI 1.961; Se 0.971, Sp 0.990). Species-level analysis revealed higher SAT sensitivity in buffaloes (0.969) than cattle (0.849), with a notable prevalence divergence in Jhang (cattle 39.6%; buffaloes 10.7%). It was concluded that a single diagnostic test alone is unreliable for screening in similar settings. SAT + iELISA in parallel is recommended for field screening and in series for culling decisions. Significant district-level variance in prevalence and species-specific diagnostic performance indicates that uniform provincial strategies may be inappropriate and that control programs should be designed at the district level and calibrated separately for cattle and buffaloes.
PUBMED_42718568	PubMed	2026	Beyond antibiotics: artificial intelligence-enabled anti-infective ecosystems for next-generation precision therapeutics against antimicrobial resistance. The rapid global expansion of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) threatens to undermine decades of progress in infectious disease management and highlights the limitations of conventional antibiotic-centered therapeutic strategies. Although emerging technologies-including antimicrobial peptides, bacteriophage therapy, CRISPR-based antimicrobials, microbiome therapeutics, anti-virulence approaches, nanotechnology-enabled drug delivery, and artificial intelligence (AI)-have individually demonstrated considerable promise, they are predominantly being developed as independent interventions rather than as coordinated components of an integrated therapeutic strategy. This Perspective proposes the Intelligent Anti-Infective Ecosystem (IAIE) as a conceptual systems-level framework that computationally integrates multimodal diagnostics, pathogen genomics, microbiome profiling, AI-assisted decision support, programmable precision therapeutics, ecological monitoring, and longitudinal clinical feedback within a continuously learning dynamically optimized workflow. Unlike existing paradigms that primarily optimize individual technologies or therapeutic decisions, IAIE emphasizes closed-loop coordination among complementary antimicrobial approaches to support precision-guided infection management while preserving microbiome integrity and mitigating resistance selection pressure. We further outline the core components, operational principles, translational challenges, and technology readiness of the major therapeutic platforms that could contribute to such an ecosystem, while distinguishing clinically established interventions from emerging experimental strategies. Importantly, IAIE should be interpreted as a prospective conceptual architecture rather than an existing clinical platform. Its proposed clinical value remains to be established through sequential computational, preclinical, and prospective clinical investigations using standardized microbiological, ecological, and patient-centered outcome measures. By framing antimicrobial innovation within an responsive systems perspective, IAIE provides a roadmap for future multidisciplinary research aimed at integrating artificial intelligence and systems microbiology to enable sustainable management of antimicrobial resistance.
PUBMED_42768430	PubMed	2026	Beyond the Single Chemical: A Systems Toxicology Perspective on Water Pollution in the Anthropocene. Water pollution in the Anthropocene is defined by chemical complexity-thousands of contaminants occur as dynamic mixtures, many of which are unregulated, unidentified, or present at concentrations below individual effect thresholds. Despite decades of research, the dominant paradigm for assessing water quality remains anchored in single-chemical, single-species approaches that fail to capture the cumulative, interactive, and context-dependent nature of real-world exposures. This Perspective argues for a fundamental shift toward systems toxicology as the organizing framework for understanding and mitigating water pollution. We critically assess the limitations of current regulatory toxicology, examine how emerging chemical classes and nonchemical stressors such as climate change amplify risks, and identify priority research directions: advancing effect-based monitoring and bioanalytical tools, integrating exposomics with adverse outcome pathway networks, harnessing new approach methodologies and artificial intelligence for mixture risk assessment, and embedding ecological and human health considerations into a One Health framework. We further emphasize that the success of this transition depends on the parallel development of open-access chemical and toxicological databases, international harmonization of effect-based trigger values, and adaptive regulatory frameworks that can accommodate cumulative risk assessments. We contend that the transition from reductionist to systems-level thinking is not merely an academic exercise but an urgent necessity for protecting and mitigating water resources, biodiversity, and public health in an era of accelerating environmental change.
PUBMED_42741879	PubMed	2026	Biosecurity Competencies and Educational Needs Among Veterinary Professionals: A Multinational Cross-Sectional Survey. The importance of animal biosecurity is growing, and it has been incorporated into the veterinary medicine curriculum, as well as into the European Animal Health Law and the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH) Terrestrial Animal Health Code. However, few studies have been conducted to date on the self-perceived competencies acquired and the educational needs of veterinary students and practitioners in animal biosecurity. To address this, an online survey involving 651 participants from 66 countries across 5 continents was conducted (with predominance of Europe). The three sections of the survey were participant profiles, perceptions of their competencies, and additional training needs. The survey participants work in veterinary clinics, ambulatory practices, and academic environments. Main animal species managed were ruminants, companion animals, equids, poultry, and pigs. The level of agreement regarding the competencies acquired in relation to the managed species was consistent, except for the biosecurity audits. Competencies increased markedly between graduation and the tenth year of practice, followed by a slower progression. A total of 276 participants expressed a strong demand for training in biosecurity but a lower need for cleaning and disinfection protocols. No significant intercontinental differences (Africa, America, and Europe) were found for competencies in risk analysis and biosecurity audits. However, Africa showed a significantly lower median priority score for competencies related to cleaning/disinfection, animal isolation, and information sourcing. Identifying priority competencies and training gaps will enable better-targeted educational interventions, thereby contributing to Sustainable Development Goals 3 (good health and well-being) and 10 (reduced inequalities).
PUBMED_42728903	PubMed	2025	Bottom-Up Communication Approach for Effective Implementation of the One Health Initiative in Ethiopia. The One Health approach, which integrates human, animal, environmental, and plant health, is Crucial for addressing complex public health challenges in Ethiopia. It addresses zoonotic diseases, antimicrobial resistance, and ecological degradation. These issues have increased the national burden alongside efforts for infectious disease prevention and control. However, effective implementation relies on communication strategies that are participatory, context-specific, and responsive to local realities. This paper presents a bottom-up communication framework designed to enhance local ownership, strengthen multisectoral collaboration, and align policy with community needs. The proposed approach emphasizes inclusive stakeholder engagement, the capacity-building of frontline actors, and the establishment of continuous feedback loops connecting community, district, and national levels to ensure the adaptive and sustainable implementation of One Health in Ethiopia.
PUBMED_42747996	PubMed	2026	Bovine mammary tissues are susceptible to infection by viruses bearing panzootic H5N1 influenza A virus glycoproteins. The emergence of the panzootic clade 2.3.4.4b highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza in 2020 marked a major expansion in the host range of influenza A viruses (IAVs), raising concerns about further cross-species transmission events and zoonotic spillover. The introduction of 2.3.4.4b viruses into US dairy herds has resulted in widespread circulation, accompanied by reduced milk yield, mastitis and high viral loads in milk. Notably, virus circulation in dairy cattle represents a novel route for mammalian adaptation and transmission that has already led to more than 40 human cases in the USA since 2024. As haemagglutinin (HA) is the primary determinant of viral host range and tissue tropism, we investigated whether viruses containing the glycoproteins of avian H5N1 subclade 2.3.4.4b viruses could infect mammary tissue from Aberdeen Angus, Holstein Friesian and Limousin cattle. Using mammary gland explants, we inoculated tissues with attenuated reassortant viruses expressing the HA and neuraminidase (NA) of three 2.3.4.4b viruses that predated the emergence of H5N1 in the US cattle: A/chicken/England/053052/2021 (AIV07), A/chicken/Scotland/054477/2021 (AIV09) and A/chicken/England/085598/2022 (AIV48). Detection of viral NP antigen by immunohistochemistry in explants from both the teat and gland cistern for all three breeds following inoculation with AIV09 and AIV48 indicates that mammary tissue from each of the three tested cattle breeds is susceptible to infection by viruses bearing H5N1 glycoproteins. Lectin staining showed expression of both 2,3- and 2,6-linked sialic acids in the mammary tissue of all donors, indicating that all three breeds have the potential to support infection with both avian- and mammalian-adapted IAVs. Together, these findings demonstrate that the mammary glands from both beef and dairy cattle breeds are susceptible to infection with viruses bearing avian-origin H5N1 glycoproteins and suggest that bovine mammary tissue may provide an environment in which diverse IAVs could co-infect the same tissue. This possibility underscores the need for further investigation and the inclusion of both beef and dairy cattle in ongoing H5N1 surveillance and risk-assessment frameworks.
PUBMED_42754306	PubMed	2026	Breaking the cycle: Determinants and opportunities for sustainable control of cystic echinococcosis. Cystic echinococcosis (CE) remains one of the most persistent neglected zoonoses despite profound knowledge of the life cycle of Echinococcus granulosus sensu lato and the availability of well-established control tools. Persistence of CE is driven by interacting barriers, i.e., rapid reinfection of dogs, continued access of dogs to infected offal and carcasses, informal slaughter, suboptimal surveillance feedback, fragmented institutional responsibility, and misaligned economic incentives. These constraints are especially evident in sheep-farming and agro-pastoral systems, where dogs, livestock, household practices, and rural economies remain closely connected. Effective control requires a One Health approach that combines repeated praziquantel treatment of dogs, safe management of offal and carcasses, inspected slaughter, livestock surveillance, community engagement, and management of owned, semi-owned, and free-roaming dogs. This Chapter examines the underlying factors that challenge eradication of CE from many endemic settings. Particular attention is given to prevention, health education, and edutainment, since CE control primarily depends on achieving change in a small number of high-risk practices that are often normalized in daily pastoral life. Sardinia and comparable Mediterranean settings are used to illustrate how persistent sheep infection, fertile cysts, working-dog ecology, informal slaughter, incomplete dog prophylaxis, and governance gaps sustain endemic transmission even where the disease is well recognized. The Chapter argues that CE persistence reflects failures of continuity, traceability, and field delivery; durable control therefore depends on the organization of dog management, slaughter systems, surveillance, and community action as much as on parasitology.
PUBMED_42693462	PubMed	2026	Building a One Health mobile laboratory workforce: strengthening public health preparedness across Europe and Africa. The emergence and re-emergence of infectious diseases remain a major public health threat in Europe. The Horizon Europe-funded MOBILISE project addresses this challenge by establishing a One Health Mobile Laboratory capable of handling risk group 3 and 4 pathogens, while strengthening outbreak preparedness through targeted capacity-building activities and the development of a rapid-response expert network. A key component of the project is a training-of-trainers (ToT) model, which enables participants to perform critical tasks in the field and transfer expertise within their home countries. This approach expands the pool of skilled professionals and strengthens collective preparedness. A descriptive mixed-methods programme evaluation, including pre- and post-test assessments, was conducted to assess the ToT model's implementation. In the first phase, two laboratory experts from each partner country were selected. They completed online courses, followed by a two-week in-person training at the Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine in Hamburg, Germany. Training covered biosafety, molecular diagnostics, sequencing, and mobile laboratory operation. The programme concluded with four field missions, allowing participants to apply their skills and train new cohorts. The evaluation also highlighted challenges related to retaining trained experts within the expert pool over time. This structured approach enhances outbreak preparedness, fosters cross-border collaboration, and strengthens the resilience of the health system.
PUBMED_42733561	PubMed	2026	Bundibugyo virus disease evidence map: a rapid research needs appraisal. BACKGROUND: The 2026 Bundibugyo virus disease (BVD) outbreak in DRC and Uganda underscores that filoviruses remain an unpredictable global health threat, particularly in resource-limited settings. The sporadic occurrence of outbreaks has constrained evidence-generation. We implemented a Rapid Research Needs Appraisal (RRNA) to rapidly and systematically synthesise published research evidence and identify gaps in the evidence base to support management and research strategies. METHODS: We searched Ovid Medline, Embase and Scopus for primary research studies published between Jan 1, 1999, and Feb 6, 2026 by combining keywords and thesaurus headings for Bundibugyo and humans. This search was supplemented by an updated search in PubMed and MedRxiv up to June 25, 2026. Searches were conducted in English, but without language restrictions. Eligible studies including humans or human samples focused on at least one of the RRNA domains (clinical characteristics, immune response, transmission, risk factors, medical countermeasures and associated social and behavioural factors). Two reviewers screened records for inclusion, one reviewer extracted data with a second reviewer checking a proportion of the data. Data were analysed descriptively. FINDINGS: 29 primary studies were eligible for inclusion, accounting for 1593 probable or confirmed BVD cases. Of these 29 studies, most were observational (n 28, 96.6%) and were most commonly conducted in Uganda (n 15, 51.7%) and the DRC (n 10, 34.5%). Only one interventional study was included, a non-randomized interventional study exploring EBOV, SUDV and BDBV cross-reactivity following EBOV vaccination. Among studies that reported age, most (58.6%, 17/29) included adults (18+ years), eight (27.6%) included children (0-18 years), and only two (6.9%) included pregnant women. Fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, headache, fatigue, dysphagia, anorexia, dyspnoea and abdominal pain were the most commonly reported symptoms. Haemorrhagic manifestations ranged from 10.4 to 54.0%, with a meta-analysis estimating a CFR of 32.8% (CI 25.8-40.2) based on past outbreaks. Evidence on cross-reactivity to previous Ebola exposure following natural infection of vaccination was sparse and conflicting. One study identified low levels of cross-reactivity in EBOV vaccinated participants, another among EBOV survivors, whereas a third did not detect cross-reactivity following EBOV vaccination. Long-term sequelae, persistent BVD survivor stigma and limited community awareness were also reported. INTERPRETATION: Whilst acknowledging the limitations of such a rapid appraisal, our findings show that urgent, coordinated investment is needed in countermeasure trials inclusive of pregnant women and children, supported by observational studies community engagement and co-production. FUNDING: The National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) and the Wellcome Trust.
PUBMED_42755343	PubMed	2026	Can't see the forest for the trees? Statistical considerations for disease macroecology. Disease macroecology relies on large, complex datasets to understand the biotic and abiotic factors shaping parasite distributions and emerging infectious disease risk. These datasets span local to global host-parasite interactions and often integrate diverse host or parasite traits across evolutionary histories. Selecting appropriate statistical approaches requires first asking key questions about the study system: How well is the system understood? How important is predictor accuracy? How much bias is present in the data? We outline three broad analytical pathways commonly used in disease macroecology (frequentist models, Bayesian approaches, and machine learning) and link them to typical data contexts, providing R coding examples using current packages. We emphasise that these pathways are intended as flexible guidelines rather than prescriptive frameworks. Although more advanced approaches have grown in popularity over the last three decades, traditional significance tests remain widely used. While these tests remain appropriate for well-controlled or small-scale experimental systems, they are often unsuitable for complex ecological datasets, where violations of assumptions, hierarchical structure, and sampling biases can lead to unstable or difficult-to-reproduce inferences. We advocate for reporting biologically meaningful predictors, effect sizes, measures of uncertainty, and transparent analytical workflows. By explicitly linking common data challenges in disease macroecology to their consequences for model choice and inference, we encourage more reproducible, transparent, and context-appropriate statistical practices for understanding and forecasting parasite distributions and emerging disease risks.
PUBMED_42778003	PubMed	2026	Candida tropicalis in environmental and animal reservoirs: a systematic review from a One Health perspective. Candida tropicalis is an important opportunistic yeast increasingly associated with antifungal resistance across different ecological contexts. We systematically reviewed research articles published up to June 1, 2026, to investigate the distribution of C. tropicalis in non-clinical niches and synthesize evidence on its susceptibility to clinically relevant antifungals and agricultural fungicides, virulence-associated traits, and resistance-related genes. Database searches were conducted in PubMed, Web of Science, ScienceDirect, Google Scholar, Scopus, and SciELO. A total of 35 eligible studies were included, comprising 1,011 C. tropicalis isolates. Most isolates originated from environmental sources (694/1,011; 68.6%), mainly soil (159/694; 22.9%) and beach sand (124/694; 17.9%), whereas 317/1,011 (31.4%) were recovered from animal sources. Across all studies, 769 antifungal resistance or reduced-susceptibility events were identified, including 422 (54.9%) among environmental isolates and 347 (45.1%) among animal-derived isolates. Resistance was predominantly associated with azole antifungals, particularly fluconazole (FLC) (358/1,008; 35.5%; 95% CI: 32.6-38.5%), followed by itraconazole (ITZ) (116/511; 22.7%; 95% CI: 19.3-26.5%) and voriconazole (VOR) (98/418; 23.4%; 95% CI: 19.6-27.7%). Evidence of cross-resistance between clinical azoles and agricultural fungicides was reported in six of the seven studies evaluating both compound classes. Furthermore, isolates frequently exhibited virulence-associated phenotypes, including strong biofilm formation (94/130; 72.3%; 95% CI: 64.1-79.3%) and strong hemolytic activity (48/80; 60.0%; 95% CI: 49.0-70.0%). Molecular analyses identified recurrent ERG11 mutations and the overexpression of efflux pump-related genes, which are also recognized as major resistance mechanisms in clinical C. tropicalis isolates. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that environmental and animal-derived C. tropicalis isolates frequently exhibit azole resistance, including cross-resistance to agricultural fungicides, together with virulence-associated phenotypes and resistance-related genetic mechanisms consistent with those reported in clinical isolates - underscoring the role of these reservoirs in the maintenance and dissemination of resistant and virulent lineages within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42699212	PubMed	2026	Carbapenem-resistant E. coli with one-health approach in East Africa: Systematic review and meta-analysis. OBJECTIVE: Carbapenem-resistant E. coli is one of the most serious and urgent global health threats. This study aimed to explore the occurrence and characteristics of carbapenem-resistant E. coli in East African countries using a one-health approach. STUDY DESIGN: A systematic review and meta-analysis study. METHODS: This review was done based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) reporting guidelines. The protocol of this study was also registered on the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) database (Registration Identification: CRD42024626968). RESULTS: The pooled prevalence of carbapenem-resistant E. coli in East Africa among different interfaces like human, animal, environment, and food was 12.7% (95% CI: 8.6, 16.8). The environment exhibited the predominant interface for carbapenem-resistant E. coli (24.2%), followed by human (11.9%), food (7.7%) and animals (4.2%). The carbapenem-resistant E. coli prevalence decreased in 2021 - 2025 (12.6%) as compared to 2015-2020 (13.5%). High prevalence was seen in Sudan (24.7%), Uganda (17.4%), and Ethiopia (9.9%) and predominantly found in environmental samples (24.2%) and various clinical samples (15.8%). Different resistance gene variants, including serine -lactamases, metallo- -lactamases, and oxacillinase, were found in 51.7% of the studies. CONCLUSIONS: Carbapenem-resistant E. coli is prevalent and poses a potential future threat in East African countries. It needs multifaceted strategies, including regional integration beyond health policy to mitigate the problem.
PUBMED_42786201	PubMed	2026	Cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic syndrome as a mitochondrial systems disorder. Cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic (CKM) syndrome is a multisystem disorder in which obesity, diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and cardiovascular disease reinforce one another through shared pathobiological characteristics and bidirectional organ crosstalk. Rather than representing the mere coexistence of diseases, CKM syndrome can be understood as a mitochondrial systems disorder. In energy-intensive tissues such as the myocardium and renal tubules, chronic haemodynamic stress, substrate excess, hypoxia and neurohormonal activation converge on mitochondrial programmes governing oxidative phosphorylation, redox balance, organelle dynamics and quality control. Disruption of these programmes, including impaired fatty acid oxidation, suppressed biogenesis, defective mitophagy and mitochondrial DNA instability, reduces bioenergetic reserve and promotes reactive oxygen species generation, inflammatory signalling and progressive organ dysfunction. Mitochondrial dysfunction in other metabolic tissues further amplifies these processes. In the liver, reduced fatty acid oxidation promotes steatosis, insulin resistance and the release of lipids, whereas in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue, impaired oxidative capacity and insulin resistance increases lipid spillover and systemic inflammation. Mitochondria-derived signals - including FGF21, GDF15, succinate and circulating mitochondrial DNA - enable bidirectional communication between organs, reinforcing multi-organ decline in a positive-feedback loop. Advancing our understanding of mitochondrial dysfunction and inter-organ communication may provide new mechanistic insights into CKM syndrome progression and inform the development of mitochondria-targeted therapeutic strategies.
PUBMED_42725554	PubMed	2026	Catalytic Advances in Naphthalene-Decalin Liquid Organic Hydrogen Carriers: A Comprehensive Review. Liquid organic hydrogen carriers (LOHCs) provide an established framework for the safe, high-density storage, and transportation of hydrogen. Among current LOHC candidates, the naphthalene-decalin system distinguishes itself with a theoretical hydrogen storage capacity of 7.3 wt.%. However, the practical deployment of this cycle is fundamentally restricted by sluggish kinetics during deep hydrogenation, the high endothermicity of dehydrogenation, and phase transition challenges under ambient conditions. This review critically assesses the current state of catalyst and engineering development for the naphthalene and decalin platform. Specifically, it systematically synthesizes four core mechanistic pathways governing catalytic performance, including H2 activation and dissociation, PAH adsorption and activation, H2 spillover and subsurface hydrogen transport, alongside comprehensive evaluations of both hydrogenation and dehydrogenation catalysts. The core discussion links empirical catalytic performance to physical and chemical descriptors, examining how active site dispersion, electronic structure regulation, support microenvironment engineering, and bimetallic synergy dictate the activity, selectivity, and stability of noble and low-cost base metal systems. Furthermore, the review addresses the physical handling of reaction intermediates through current engineering strategies. By synthesizing these catalytic mechanisms, engineering strategies, and future perspectives, this review establishes a concrete, data-driven baseline for scaling up the naphthalene-decalin system toward practical industrial implementation.
PUBMED_42706691	PubMed	2026	Characterisation of Typical Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (tEPEC) and bfpA Genes From Five Bat Species Reveals Australian Pteropus Spp. Are Natural tEPEC Hosts. Humans have historically been considered the only natural host of typical enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (tEPEC), a cause of human infantile diarrhoea. Recent findings of bat-specific tEPEC in two Australian bat species (Pteropus poliocephalus and Pteropus conspicillatus) revealed that these Pteropus spp. are also tEPEC hosts. tEPEC pathogenicity is associated with key virulence factors including intimin (eae) and the bundle-forming pilus (bfp) operon, which contains the bfpA gene. This study characterised 63 tEPEC isolates from five Australian Pteropus spp.; four from mainland Australia (P. poliocephalus, P. conspicillatus, P. alecto and P. scapulatus) and one from Christmas Island (P. natalis). The 63 tEPEC isolates included 10 novel tEPEC strains and eight previously identified Pteropus tEPEC strains. Faecal DNA samples (n 386) from the five Australian Pteropus spp. were screened for eae and bfpA genes to identify tEPEC-positive samples. The estimated true prevalence of tEPEC ranged from 14.2% to 37.0% across the five Pteropus spp. Typing of 119 bfpA alleles (63 tEPEC isolates and 56 faecal DNA samples) from the five Pteropus spp. identified 27 bfpA allele types, 24 of which belonged to bat-specific bfpA lineages. Bat-specific bfpA alleles were shared between tEPEC strains, Pteropus spp. and across regions, including the geographically isolated P. natalis endemic to Christmas Island. This study reveals that diverse bat-specific tEPEC strains and bfpA types have evolved in Pteropus spp. and have been circulating among populations for an extensive period, thereby confirming that all Australian Pteropus spp. are natural tEPEC hosts.
PUBMED_42749632	PubMed	2026	Characterization of the oral microbiota and antimicrobial resistance genes in shelter dogs in Japan. Companion animals can serve as reservoirs of antimicrobial resistance genes and zoonotic microorganisms, yet information on shelter dogs remains limited. This study characterized the oral microbiota and screened for antimicrobial resistance genes in shelter dogs in Japan. Oral swabs were collected from 81 dogs, microbial genomic DNA was extracted, bacterial communities were profiled by 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing, and antimicrobial resistance genes were screened by PCR. We detected genes conferring resistance to several antimicrobial classes, including -lactams, tetracyclines, macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B, phenicols, and sulfonamides. cfxA was detected in all 81 samples, followed by sul1 (66/81), tet(M) and sul2 (65/81), floR (39/81), mecA (17/81), and erm(B) (15/81). We identified potentially pathogenic genera including Capnocytophaga, Pasteurella, Fusobacterium, Campylobacter and Corynebacterium. Microbiome analysis revealed that at the phylum level, Pseudomonadota and Bacteroidota were the most dominant, while Porphyromonas, Frederiksenia and Moraxella were the most prevalent genera. Our findings highlight that (i) the oral microbiota of shelter dogs broadly resembles that reported in companion dogs and (ii) shelter dogs represent an overlooked reservoir of clinically relevant antimicrobial resistance genes and potentially zoonotic bacteria. Therefore, it is necessary to include shelter animals in antimicrobial resistance surveillance programs to capture any potential gaps in the antimicrobial resistance prevalence in companion animals and prevent dissemination of resistant bacteria to humans following adoption of shelter dogs and cats.
PUBMED_42751460	PubMed	2026	Climate Justice and One Health Adaptation Policies in Public Health and Disaster Medicine. BACKGROUND: Climate change is intensifying public health risks and placing increasing pressure on disaster medicine systems. These challenges require adaptation strategies that incorporate climate justice principles and the One Health framework. OBJECTIVE: This scoping review aimed to examine how climate justice and One Health principles are incorporated into public health and disaster medicine adaptation policies. METHODS: A scoping review was conducted according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-analyses extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) guideline using major scientific databases (Scopus, PubMed and Web of Science) and global health organization resources published between 01 January 2005 and 31 October 2025. Critical appraisal of included evidence was assessed using design specific tools: the JBI Critical Appraisal Checklist for systematic reviews and the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT) for mixed methods studies. Data were synthesized to assess the degree of public health engagement in climate adaptation and the incorporation of climate justice and One Health principles. RESULTS: Out of a total of 19,835 records, eight eligible studies were included. The eight studies comprised six review articles and two mixed methods studies, with geographic coverage, including Pakistan, the United States, Greece and multi country or global analyses. Findings reveal persistent inequities in climate-related health impacts, particularly among marginalized and resource-limited populations. Health sector participation in national adaptation plans remains limited, with policies often fragmented, mitigation-oriented or insufficiently aligned with One Health principles. Structural inequalities, weak governance, gender disparities and limited multisector coordination hinder equitable adaptation. Climate stressors, including extreme weather events, air pollution, vector-borne diseases and environmental degradation, disproportionately affect communities with the lowest adaptive capacity. CONCLUSIONS: There is an urgent need for standardized vulnerability assessment frameworks, stronger multisector collaboration, improved early-warning systems and enhanced capacity building through international public health institutions.
PUBMED_42735690	PubMed	2026	Climate change and animal infectious diseases: a systematic review of emerging evidence. Climate change is increasingly recognised as a major driver of infectious disease dynamics, yet its impact on animal health remains understudied compared with its impact on human populations. This systematic review aimed to assess the effects of climate variability and change on the epidemiology of animal infectious diseases, focusing on measurable changes in disease incidence, prevalence, mortality, and geographical distribution. We searched PubMed and CAB Abstracts for studies published between Jan 1, 1970, and Dec 31, 2024, and identified 33 eligible studies that that assessed associations between climatic factors and observed disease outcomes in animal populations. The evidence base has grown over the past decade but remains geographically and taxonomically imbalanced. Most (24 73% of 33) studies reported positive associations between climatic variables and increased disease risk, expanded geographical ranges, or higher prevalence. Vector-mediated mechanisms were consistently proposed as underlying drivers (25 76% of 33). Domestic species were the most frequently studied hosts (18 55% of 33), whereas wildlife hosts were under-represented (11 33% of 33). Four studies (12%) included mixed host populations. 6200 studies identified by our search were excluded because they relied solely on environmental suitability indices, vector abundance models, or synthetic epidemiological outcomes, highlighting a persistent scarcity of longitudinal empirical disease data linked to long-term changes in weather and climate. Although modelling approaches are valuable for risk projection, the poor availability of longitudinal epidemiological data constrains validation and attribution. Overall, the available evidence suggests that climate variability and change are reshaping animal infectious disease epidemiology, with important implications for animal health, food security, and zoonotic risk. However, important gaps in our understanding of these dynamics remain. Bridging these gaps, strengthening climate-aware surveillance, expanding data accessibility, and integrating animal health into One Health strategies will be essential to address emerging health risks.
PUBMED_42699333	PubMed	2026	Climate change impact on disease emergence and antimicrobial resistance: A perspective on transmission and detection. Climate change is increasingly disrupting environmental and ecological systems, creating conditions that facilitate the emergence, transmission, and persistence of infectious diseases and the spread of antimicrobial resistance (AMR). This scoping review analyzed 427 articles published over the past five years, retrieved from major scientific databases. Findings show that climate variables significantly influence pathogen growth, reproduction, and transmission through vectors. Strong associations were identified between climatic changes and the spread of bacterial, viral, fungal, and protozoal diseases. Temperature fluctuations and anoxic conditions can promote AMR development. Climate-driven migration of birds and bats further contributes to cross-border pathogen transmission. The review also highlights emerging AI tools for rapid pathogen detection, diagnosis, and surveillance. Overall, climate change poses significant public health risks through increased infectious and non-infectious disease burden, zoonotic spillover, and AMR spread, emphasizing the need for integrated climate-health policies, AMR stewardship, AI-enabled surveillance, and interdisciplinary One Health research.
PUBMED_42693475	PubMed	2026	Climate change reshapes the potential transmission risk of human alveolar and cystic echinococcosis in western China: a projection based on MaxEnt models. BACKGROUND: Echinococcosis, a severe zoonotic parasitic disease, imposes a significant health burden in western China, primarily as alveolar (AE) and cystic (CE) forms caused by Echinococcus multilocularis (Em) and E. granulosus sensu lato (Egsl), respectively. Its transmission, tied to a complex host cycle, is strongly influenced by climatic factors. This study aimed to model the ecological niches of these parasites, validate predictions with epidemiological data, and project the impact of climate change on future transmission risk geography. METHODS: Utilizing location data of 1247 human cases diagnosed in western China from 1981 to 2016, obtained from the National Echinococcosis Control Program, and contemporary climate data, we developed optimized Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) models. This involved defining an appropriate spatial resolution, screening 19 bioclimatic variables to select key predictors (7 for Em, 6 for Egsl), and identifying optimal model parameters. Model performance was evaluated using the Area Under the Curve (AUC) and AUC of 10% Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUCpROC) curve, and validity was assessed via correlation with county-level incidence. Future habitat suitability was projected for multiple periods (2011-2100) under three climate scenarios (SSP-126, SSP-370, SSP-585) generated by 5 global climate models. RESULTS: The models demonstrated high predictive accuracy (AUC 0.92; AUCpROC: 0.084 for Em, 0.070 for Egsl) and a significant positive correlation with incidence ( 0.6, P 0.0001). Em and Egsl exhibited distinct climatic niches: Em prefers cool, stable climates with moderate summer moisture, while Egsl spreads in areas with dry-cold winters, warm-humid summers, and moderate seasonality. Future projections reveal a spatially heterogeneous reshaping of risk. While overall suitability increases, Em's suitable area is projected to shift toward higher altitudes (e.g., expanding in Qinghai and Xizang but contracting in Ningxia and Gansu). In contrast, Egsl shows widespread outward expansion from current endemic margins, particularly across the Tibetan Plateau. Qinghai and Xizang are identified as key expansion hotspots for both Em and Egsl. CONCLUSION: The findings confirm distinct ecological drivers for the suitability of Em and Egsl, and indicate that climate change will potentially shift the endemic areas of AE and expand those of CE in western China. This underscores the necessity for forward-looking, spatially targeted surveillance and control strategies, informed by a One Health approach, to mitigate the evolving burden of echinococcosis.
PUBMED_42787090	PubMed	2026	Climate change, forced pastoralist migration, and zoonotic spillover in Somalia: a neglected one health threat to regional health security. Climate change is reshaping pastoralist mobility across Somalia, creating overlooked pathways for zoonotic disease emergence. Recurrent droughts, floods, and environmental degradation force livestock-dependent communities into new ecological interfaces where humans, livestock, wildlife, and vectors increasingly interact. Weak surveillance, fragile health systems, and limited cross-border coordination further heighten outbreak risks. Strengthening One Health surveillance through community-based reporting, mobile health and veterinary services, integrated laboratory systems, and regional data sharing is essential to improve early detection, reduce spillover risk, and strengthen health security in the Horn of Africa.
PUBMED_42697353	PubMed	2026	Climate-driven expansion of climatic suitability for Phlebotomus mascittii at its northern distribution margin in Western Europe under future socioeconomic scenarios. Climate change is expected to drive the northward expansion of phlebotomine sand flies in Europe, increasing the potential for transmission of vector-borne pathogens such as Leishmania infantum. This study assessed the historical baseline and future climatic suitability for Phlebotomus mascittii, the northernmost distributed sand fly species in Europe, across Western Europe. A mixed-effects logistic regression model was developed using summer climatic variables and land cover data, based on standardised field surveys conducted in 2023-2024 across France, Germany, Luxembourg, Belgium, and the Netherlands. The model was applied to project future suitability under three Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP2-4.5, SSP3-7.0, SSP5-8.5) for the periods 2041-2060 and 2081-2100. Results indicate an increase of 20-30 percentage points in predicted climatic suitability relative to the historical baseline across Luxembourg, Belgium, western Germany, and the southern Netherlands by 2041-2060 under all SSP scenarios. By 2081-2100, this expansion intensifies, reaching projected average increases in climatic suitability across the study area of approximately 28 percentage points under SSP2-4.5, 45 percentage points under SSP3-7.0, and 57 percentage points under SSP5-8.5, with the largest increases occurring in the northernmost regions. The model showed moderate discrimination (AUC 0.74, 95% CI: 0.68-0.80), with grouped 5-fold cross-validation yielding a mean AUC of 0.71. At the optimal threshold (0.164), apparent sensitivity was 0.55 and specificity 0.83 (accuracy 0.80; TSS 0.39). Accordingly, the projections should be interpreted as indicators of areas with increasing climatic suitability rather than precise predictions of future species occurrence, establishment, or pathogen transmission. Overall, the findings suggest that climate change may substantially expand climatically suitable areas for Ph. mascittii in the northern distribution margin in Western Europe, highlighting the need for adaptive surveillance and providing a spatial framework to support targeted vector surveillance and future One Health preparedness.
PUBMED_42789295	PubMed	2026	Climate-driven host ecology as a framework for zoonotic disease risk: Understanding transferability across arenavirus systems. Mechanistic frameworks linking climate to zoonotic disease risk through host ecology remain rare, limiting transferable insights across systems. We develop a Bayesian framework combining an integral projection model of rodent demography with a compartmental disease model. Applied to capture-mark-recapture data from the Natal multimammate mouse (Mastomys natalensis; N 20,249 captures, 1994-2023) and serological data on the Lassa virus-related Morogoro arenavirus (N 7,850 tests, 2010-2017), the framework jointly estimates climatic, demographic, and transmission parameters. Rainfall was a dominant driver of rodent recruitment, with seasonal rainfall explaining 52.1% (95% CrI 2.1 to 79.0%) of modeled recruitment variation. In a field-first, we estimate that 79.1% (95% CrI 69.3 to 88.9%) of infected pregnancies result in vertical transmission, identifying this as the primary mechanism maintaining viral persistence between breeding seasons. We assess framework transferability to capture the seasonal dynamics of Lassa fever outbreaks in Nigeria (N 6,469 laboratory-confirmed cases, 2018-2025), substituting model climate inputs without refitting any parameters. Predicted peaks in rodent subadult infections preceded observed outbreaks by 0.92 mo (95% CrI -2.76 to 0.92), with 83% of predicted and observed peaks falling within 28 d Pr( 28d) 0.83 , substantially outperforming seasonal rainfall or rodent demography Pr( 28d) 0.11 . Infected adult peaks lagged observed outbreaks by 0.92 mo Pr( 28d) 0.56 , suggesting subadults might primarily be responsible for zoonotic hazard. Outbreak magnitude was not reproduced, likely reflecting human behavioral and surveillance factors beyond the model's scope. These results illustrate how mechanistic frameworks grounded in reservoir host ecology can yield transferable insights into zoonotic risk, with potential application across other climate-sensitive host-pathogen systems.
PUBMED_42729977	PubMed	2026	Climate-stressed crop mycobiomes as pre-harvest sentinels of human mycotoxin exposure: an AI-enabled One Health framework linking dysbiosis, exposomics, and toxicopathology. Climate change is altering the conditions under which crop-associated fungi colonize plants and produce mycotoxins. Current control relies on both pre-harvest management and post-harvest testing; however, field-level fungal-community changes are rarely used to guide where and when testing should be intensified. This Review critically compares evidence linking weather and crop stress, fungal-community composition, toxigenic strain activity, contamination during harvest and storage, human biomarkers, and organ-specific effects. On this basis, we propose the Crop Mycobiome-Exposome-Toxicopathology Axis as a testable One Health model, not as a validated diagnostic pathway. Heat, drought, rainfall sequence, insect injury, drying delay, and storage moisture can alter host susceptibility and fungal competition, but their effects differ by crop, fungal guild, and stage of the food chain. Evidence is strongest for climate-linked aflatoxin modelling, maize mycobiome-toxin associations, atoxigenic Aspergillus biocontrol, biomonitoring feasibility, and aflatoxin-related hepatocarcinogenesis. Direct field-to-human datasets remain scarce. We therefore conclude that crop mycobiome measurements may complement, but cannot replace, toxin assays and post-harvest controls. The priority is prospective, paired field-food-human research that tests whether mycobiome indicators improve prediction and intervention timing beyond weather and commodity testing alone.
PUBMED_42738523	PubMed	2026	Climatic Correlates of Brucellosis Transmission in a Semi-Arid Region of Xinjiang, China, 2015-2025: A Maximum Entropy Modeling Study Within a One Health Framework. More than 80% of global brucellosis cases occur in semi-arid regions; however, the climatic factors associated with these outbreaks remain poorly understood. This study investigated environmental correlates of brucellosis in a semi-arid region of Xinjiang, China. A maximum entropy (MaxEnt) model incorporating 19 bioclimatic variables, wind speed, solar radiation, and ruminant livestock inventory was applied to 1132 surveillance-confirmed human brucellosis cases from January 2015 to December 2025. Precipitation in the driest month (31.8%), wind speed (24.3%), and temperature seasonality (13.7%) were the leading contributors to the predicted risk. The model identified high-risk zones in low-precipitation moderate-wind steppe environments and showed strong predictive performance (AUC 0.960 0.007). These findings indicate that water scarcity and thermal variability are key environmental constraints associated with brucellosis distribution in semi-arid ecosystems and may inform climate-resilient One Health-based prevention strategies in similar agro-ecological zones globally.
PUBMED_42709285	PubMed	2026	Clinical and epidemiological features of cat-scratch disease: a 16-year case retrospective study in a portuguese tertiary care centre. PURPOSE: Cat-scratch disease (CSD), primarily caused by Bartonella henselae, is a well-recognized zoonosis with a broad clinical spectrum, in which atypical manifestations may delay diagnosis. This study aimed to characterize the clinical and epidemiological profile of CSD at a Portuguese tertiary care centre and to evaluate the role of molecular and serological methods as complementary tools. METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cohort study including all patients with laboratory-confirmed CSD diagnosed at Unidade Local de Sa de de S o Jo o, Porto, between 2010 and 2025. PCR-positive specimens were further characterized by sequencing for Bartonella species identification. Comparative analyses were performed according to clinical presentation (typical versus systemic disease). RESULTS: Thirty-nine patients were included (median age 15 years), of whom 53.8% were paediatric. Cat exposure was reported in 94.9% of cases. Information regarding flea infestation and preventive measures in companion animals was unavailable. Systemic presentations occurred in 43.6% (17/39) of patients, most of whom (94.1%, 16/17) were immunocompetent. Among PCR-positive specimens successfully characterized by sequencing, all were identified as B. henselae. PCR positivity was higher in lymph node tissue than in blood specimens (79.2% vs. 15.8%). The median time from symptom onset to diagnosis was 52.5 days. At the time of diagnosis, serology was positive for IgG antibodies in 76.0% and IgM in 28.0% of CSD patients. Azithromycin monotherapy was most frequently used for typical disease (81.8%), whereas combination therapy was more commonly used in systemic cases (76.5%). Clinical resolution after a single treatment course was achieved in 74.4% of patients. CONCLUSION: CSD frequently presented with systemic involvement, including in immunocompetent patients. The prolonged delay between symptom onset and diagnosis highlights the need for increased clinical awareness, and improved access to serological and molecular diagnostics. Given the high frequency of cat exposure among affected patients, One Health strategies focused on responsible pet ownership, regular flea control and veterinary follow-up, may contribute to reducing Bartonella transmission and the burden of CSD.
PUBMED_42713208	PubMed	2026	Clinico-Epidemiological Profile of Leptospirosis Among Patients Attending a Tertiary Care Center in Rajasthan. Background and objective Leptospirosis is a globally prevalent zoonotic disease with a differential diagnosis of acute febrile illness that is significantly underreported in Rajasthan, India. This study aimed to assess the seropositivity for Leptospira in patients attending a tertiary care center in Rajasthan and study their clinico-epidemiological profile. Material and methods A cross-sectional study was conducted between July 2019 and June 2022 at the Advanced Research Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Medical College and Hospital, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India. Serum samples from 2,996 patients presenting with undifferentiated febrile illness/pyrexia of unknown origin (UFI/PUO) were tested for Leptospira IgM antibodies using an IgM capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). A total of 290 patients with a duration of illness of less than five days underwent Leptospira testing by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Demographic characteristics, clinical features, exposure history, and duration of animal contact were obtained from the specimen requisition forms. Data were analyzed using appropriate statistical methods. Results A seropositivity of 5.01% (150/2,996) for Leptospira was found in the present study, with a male predominance of 58.67% (88/150) and 41.33% (62/150) female among positive cases. All samples (290) tested negative by PCR. The highest positivity was observed in the age group of 19-30 years. Highest positivity was observed during the monsoon and post-monsoon periods and winter (July-December, peak December) in Rajasthan. Seasonal analysis revealed that December consistently showed high positivity (10.70%), followed by July (8.53%), October (8.0%), and February (6.07%). However, the highest positivity was seen in November 2020 (36.36%) and December 2020 (20%). All 150 patients reported symptoms like fever and myalgia, whereas 76% (114/150) presented with headaches. Prolonged contact with animals and lack of awareness about zoonotic diseases were identified as major risk factors contributing to disease transmission in Rajasthan. Conclusion Leptospirosis is an underdiagnosed cause of acute febrile illness in Rajasthan, with animal exposure being a significant risk factor in our setting, particularly during the monsoon and post-monsoon seasons. Enhanced diagnostic facilities, increased awareness among clinicians, and targeted public health interventions are crucial to reducing associated morbidity and mortality.
PUBMED_42675525	PubMed	2026	Cluster of 19 cases of eosinophilic meningitis due to Angiostrongylus cantonensis in Lifou, New Caledonia: an outbreak investigation. BACKGROUND: Eosinophilic meningitis due to Angiostrongylus cantonensis (AC) is an emerging parasitic disease worldwide but remains endemic in the Pacific region. In New Caledonia, sporadic cases occur each year, and the route of transmission is often unclear. In January 2023, an unusual cluster of three cases occurred in a village on Lifou Island following week-long community festivities, leading to an epidemiological investigation to determine the outbreak scope, the source of contamination, and inform public health interventions. METHODS: We conducted a retrospective epidemiological and environmental investigation in one month after the suspected exposure. Cases were defined according to international criteria and classified as confirmed, probable, or suspected. Clinical data, attendance at the festivities and food exposures were collected from medical records and interviews. Environmental observations focused on potential contamination sources in food preparation areas. Serological analyses were performed in symptomatic and asymptomatic exposed individuals. Descriptive statistics were used to summarize demographic, clinical, and exposure characteristics. RESULTS: Nineteen cases were identified, including three confirmed and sixteen suspected cases; no probable cases were identified. Headache was the predominant symptom, often associated with vomiting or paresthesias. All cases attended festivities on December 27, 2022 suggesting a common exposure during that day. The median incubation period was 3 weeks (IQR: 2-4). Two exposure hypotheses were identified: beverages diluted with rainwater and contamination of blended fruit juice. Environmental investigations revealed rats and gastropods around rainwater reservoirs and food preparation areas, including on utensils left to dry outdoors. No AC DNA was detected in water samples. Serology for AC was positive in all confirmed cases (3/3), in 13 of 14 tested suspected cases, and in all ten exposed asymptomatic individuals tested 9 months after the outbreak. CONCLUSIONS: This investigation highlights the diagnostic and epidemiological challenges of neuroangiostrongyliasis in endemic areas, where mild presentations often remain unconfirmed and where the value of serological testing is limited by the lack of baseline seroprevalence data. The findings support the hypothesis of accidental incorporation of a heavily infected gastropod into blended fruit juice during preparation, potentially facilitated by open-air kitchen practices in rural Pacific settings.
PUBMED_42784354	PubMed	2026	Co-Endemic Zoonoses, Divergent Dynamics: A Comparative Spatiotemporal Analysis of Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever and Brucellosis with Implications for Integrated Surveillance. Co-endemic zoonoses may occur in the same broad geographic settings but not necessarily the same communities or time periods. This study investigated whether Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) and brucellosis exhibit convergent or divergent spatiotemporal patterns across geographic scales in a livestock-dependent, CCHF-endemic province of T rkiye. This retrospective study analyzed confirmed human CCHF and brucellosis cases reported to the national infectious disease surveillance system between 2011 and 2024. Temporal analyses, kernel density estimation, settlement-level random labeling, and within- and cross-disease Knox tests were performed. Among the 611 eligible cases, CCHF (n 442; 72.3%) and brucellosis (n 116; 19.0%) accounted for 91.3%. CCHF was strongly seasonal, with 99.3% of cases occurring between April and September, whereas brucellosis occurred throughout the year. Although broad density surfaces partially overlapped, same-settlement co-occurrence was substantially lower than expected (O/E 0.37; p 0.001) and remained so in the sensitivity analysis (O/E 0.74; p 0.001). Cross-disease analysis showed no evidence that CCHF and brucellosis occurred closer together in both space and time than expected. Annualized CCHF concentration peaked in 2020-2021, whereas brucellosis peaked in 2022-2024. Integrated surveillance may use shared regional infrastructure, but interventions should be tailored to disease-specific settlements, transmission pathways, and periods of risk.
PUBMED_42765035	PubMed	2026	Community dissemination of blaCTX-M-dominant extended-spectrum -lactamase-producing Escherichia coli with widespread multidrug resistance in domestic cats from Ecuador: A One Health molecular epidemiological study. BACKGROUND AND AIM: Extended-spectrum -lactamase (ESBL)-producing Escherichia coli represents an increasing One Health threat because of its dissemination among humans, animals, and the environment and its frequent association with multidrug resistance (MDR). Companion animals may serve as reservoirs of clinically important resistant bacteria; however, molecular epidemiological information on ESBL-producing E. coli in domestic cats from Ecuador remains limited. This study aimed to determine the prevalence, antimicrobial susceptibility patterns, -lactamase gene distribution, and potential risk factors associated with ESBL-producing E. coli carriage in domestic cats from Machala, Ecuador. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted from August 2023 to August 2024 involving 199 domestic cats presented to the Veterinary Clinic of the Universidad T cnica de Machala. Rectal swabs were cultured on CHROMagar ESBL, and ESBL production was phenotypically confirmed using the double-disk synergy test according to Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute criteria. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing against 12 agents was performed using the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion method. Polymerase chain reaction was used to detect , , and . MDR was defined as non-susceptibility to at least one antimicrobial agent in three or more categories. Risk factor associations were evaluated using Pearson's chi-square or Fisher's exact test. RESULTS: ESBL-producing E. coli was detected in 83 of 199 cats, corresponding to a prevalence of 41.7% (95% confidence interval: 35.1-48.7). The gene predominated in 60/83 isolates (72.3%), followed by in 19/83 (22.9%) and in 1/83 (1.2%). At least one targeted gene was detected in 64/83 isolates (77.1%), whereas 19/83 phenotypically positive isolates lacked all three targeted genes. MDR was observed in 74/83 isolates (89.2%). All isolates remained susceptible to imipenem and meropenem, whereas the highest resistance rates were recorded for trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, tetracycline, cefepime, levofloxacin, and doxycycline. None of the evaluated risk factors was significantly associated with ESBL gene positivity. CONCLUSION: Domestic cats in Machala showed a high prevalence of -dominant, multidrug-resistant ESBL-producing E. coli. These findings indicate widespread community dissemination and support the inclusion of companion animals in Ecuadorian antimicrobial resistance surveillance and stewardship programs under a coordinated One Health framework.
PUBMED_42743166	PubMed	2026	Community-tailored One Health educational intervention to enhance knowledge and practices for zoonotic disease prevention in rural Thailand: A protocol for a prospective cluster randomised controlled Trial in Chanthaburi, Thailand (Saan Suk trial). BACKGROUND: Zoonotic infectious disease risk arises at human-animal-environment interfaces where pathogen spillover can occur. Rural communities living in biodiverse settings may experience frequent contact with wildlife and shared environments through livelihoods, food practices, and economic activities. Reducing spillover risk and strengthening pandemic prevention requires both structural and individual-level change. Community-based interventions that promote awareness, risk perception, self-efficacy, pro-environmental behaviour, and safe coexistence with wildlife may support prevention by shifting behavioural determinants of zoonotic disease risk. The Saan Suk intervention was co-developed with rural communities in Thailand using a Human-Centred Design approach and is grounded in the Health Belief Model and One Health principles. The intervention is intended to be feasible, acceptable, and deliverable through Thailand's established Village Health Volunteer (VHV) system. METHODS: This protocol describes a parallel-arm, cluster-randomised controlled superiority trial that will be conducted during July - October 2026, in Chanthaburi Province, Thailand. 24 villages will be equally randomised to the Saan Suk intervention or the current practice (control). In intervention villages, trained VHVs will deliver, once a week over four weeks, a multimodal One Health educational intervention designed to improve knowledge of zoonotic spillover, promote protective behaviours, reduce risky wildlife-related contacts, and support respectful coexistence with wildlife. Trained outcome assessment teams will conduct structured interviews with 42 adult participants per village, yielding a total sample size of 1,008 participants. The sample size was calculated for the primary outcome, accounting for clustering, with 90% power to detect a medium effect size (6 points on the 0-100 knowledge scale) at a significance level of 0.05, accounting for a design effect with an ICC of 0.028. The primary outcome is knowledge of zoonotic spillover, transmission pathways, risk factors, protective and risky behaviours, and safe coexistence with wildlife. Secondary outcomes include attitudes, self-efficacy, preventive and risky behaviours, and reported contacts with major local reservoir hosts. A structured questionnaire was developed, expert-reviewed, and piloted for the outcome assessment. Outcomes will be analysed using mixed-effects regression models with random effects for village and adjustment for relevant pre-specified confounders. Primary analyses will follow the intention-to-treat principle. DISCUSSION: This trial will evaluate whether a co-designed, VHV-delivered One Health educational programme can improve knowledge of zoonotic disease prevention and behavioural determinants in rural communities living in close contact with wildlife and shared ecosystems. If effective and feasible, Saan Suk could inform integration into routine VHV training and community-based zoonotic disease and pandemic prevention strategies. TRIAL REGISTRATION: The Saan Suk trial is registered with the German Clinical Trials Register (DRKS). Registration ID: DRKS00038582; date of registration: 11 May 2026.
PUBMED_42733281	PubMed	2026	Comparative Genomic Analysis of Multidrug-Resistant Escherichia coli Across Poultry-Human-Environmental Interfaces. The emergence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) Escherichia coli in poultry represents a critical One Health concern, particularly in developing countries. This study employed a comparative genomic approach to investigate the genomic characteristics, antimicrobial resistance (AMR) profiles, virulence determinants, of poultry-derived MDR E. coli isolates from Bangladesh. Whole-genome sequencing of three representative MDR isolates, identified with 83 globally diverse poultry, human, and environmental E. coli genomes. Pangenome analysis identified the characteristic open pangenome of E. coli, with core genes comprising only 4.6% of the combined dataset. Resistome analysis shown diverse AMR determinants, including blaCTX-M, blaTEM, sul, tet, and qnrS1, associated with antibiotic inactivation and efflux mechanisms. Virulence profiling revealed diverse genes involved in adhesion (fim, csg), iron acquisition (ent, fep, chu), motility, and secretion systems, with core virulence genes exhibiting 90% sequence identity, whereas accessory virulence genes were more variable. Plasmid analysis demonstrated heterogeneous replicon types, predominantly IncF and Col plasmids, indicating their role in horizontal gene transfer. Jaccard similarity indices revealed moderate to high genetic overlap with global strains ( 0.63 for virulence genes and 0.55 for AMR profiles), suggesting shared evolutionary backgrounds. Phylogenomic and MLST identified all Bangladeshi isolates as ST457, clustering within a globally distributed clonal complex linked to ST10 and ST131 lineages. These findings suggest that the three Bangladeshi poultry-derived E. coli isolates are genetically related to globally circulating strains while harboring extensive resistance and virulence determinants, emphasizing poultry as an important reservoir of MDR pathogens and reinforcing the need for strengthened antimicrobial stewardship and genomic surveillance.
PUBMED_42685492	PubMed	2026	Comparative genomic epidemiology of food- and patient-derived diarrheagenic Escherichia coli from sentinel surveillance in Southeast China. Diarrheagenic Escherichia coli (DEC) remains an important foodborne pathogen, yet long-term comparative genomic surveillance data jointly characterizing food-derived and patient-derived isolates remain limited. This surveillance-based comparative study integrated antimicrobial susceptibility testing and whole-genome sequencing to characterize diarrheagenic Escherichia coli isolates recovered from food and patient sources in Lishui, Southeast China, during 2018-2025, with emphasis on occurrence, resistance profiles, genomic backgrounds, and plasmid replicon-associated features. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed for 258 selected isolates, and whole-genome sequencing was conducted for a curated analytical subset of 204 isolates. The sequenced subset was used for diversity-oriented comparative genomic analysis rather than for unbiased prevalence estimation of the entire DEC collection. EAEC predominated in both sources, although food-associated occurrence was heterogeneous across categories, with the highest recovery rate observed in raw meat. Patient-derived isolates showed a broader overall resistance burden, whereas food-derived isolates retained substantial resistance to tetracycline, chloramphenicol, and florfenicol. Phylogenetic analysis showed partial overlap in genomic backgrounds between food-derived and patient-derived isolates, while representative resistance determinants displayed both broadly distributed and lineage-enriched patterns. Replicon-based plasmid profiling identified 42 plasmid types, including 12 detected in both sources, with IncF-related replicons predominating among these shared profiles. Several food-derived isolates carried multiple plasmid replicon types that were also observed in patient-derived isolates. Overall, food-derived and patient-derived DEC showed partial overlap in genomic backgrounds, resistance determinants, and replicon-defined plasmid profiles within this surveillance setting, while retaining source-associated heterogeneity. These findings should be interpreted as surveillance-based comparative evidence rather than as evidence of direct source attribution or transmission.
PUBMED_42784629	PubMed	2026	Comparative lipidomic profiling of African trypanosomes reveals metabolic distinctions impacting pan-species drug development. African trypanosomes are a group of pathogens that cause disease in humans (human African trypanosomiasis; HAT) and animals (African animal trypanosomosis; AAT) across sub-Saharan Africa, leading to profound impacts on human health as well as economic instability. Achieving sustainable disease control requires a One Health approach, yet the development of urgently required pan-species chemotherapeutics is severely hindered by a lack of unified biological understanding of the causative species. A major bottleneck in drug discovery is the distinct in vitro requirements of the clinically relevant species. Whilst Trypanosoma brucei is typically cultured in FBS-supplemented culture, T. congolense, the primary cause of AAT, requires the use of goat serum. The differing serum supplementation requirements of these two trypanosome species point to metabolic distinctions, which may be important considerations in developing experimental systems to enable the identification and design of novel, pan-species therapies. In this study, untargeted LC-MS lipidomics analyses were conducted to determine the relative lipidomic profiles of T. brucei and T. congolense bloodstream form parasites. The use of a novel medium formulation that permits effective in vitro culture of both species revealed that their lipidomic profiles are distinct. Notably, ether phospholipids, key molecules in T. brucei lipid biology, are relatively absent in T. congolense. Furthermore, the T. brucei lipidome is enriched with shorter chain saturated lipids, whilst T. congolense exhibits a preference for longer-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). These observations indicate that there are significant differences in the ways these parasites synthesise and remodel their lipid complement, highlighting an evolutionary divergence between the species that likely carries implications for host-pathogen interactions as well as trypanosome membrane biology. Crucially, defining the species-specific lipid dependencies provides the foundation for pan-species culture systems, thereby removing a critical barrier to the discovery and design of novel therapeutics effective against all African trypanosome species.
PUBMED_42749445	PubMed	2026	Comprehensive profiling of antibiotic resistance genes and functional clusters of orthologous groups annotation of gut microbiota in Indonesian Kedu chickens. Antibiotic resistance is a growing global health concern, with poultry systems acting as important reservoirs of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs). However, resistome and functional profiles of indigenous chickens raised under traditional systems remain underexplored. This study aimed to characterize the antibiotic resistome, virulence factor genes, and metabolic potential of gut microbiota in Indonesian Kedu chickens using a shotgun metagenomic approach. Digesta samples from five gastrointestinal segments of 21 healthy adult chickens were analyzed through high-throughput sequencing. ARGs were identified using the Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD) and Antibiotic Resistance Genes Databases (ARDB), while virulence factors and functional genes were annotated using Virulence Factor Database (VFDB), Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG), and Carbohydrate-Active EnZymes (CAZy) databases. Results revealed a diverse resistome dominated by multidrug resistance and efflux pump mechanisms, with prominent genes associated with fluoroquinolone, tetracycline, -lactam, and glycopeptide resistance. The detection of clinically relevant ARGs suggests that genetic determinants associated with antimicrobial resistance are present in the gut microbiota of traditionally raised Kedu chickens, although metagenomic data alone cannot determine whether these genes are actively expressed or confer phenotypic resistance. Virulence factor analysis showed functions related to adherence, immune evasion, iron acquisition, quorum sensing, and efflux activity, reflecting strong microbial adaptability. Functional profiling demonstrated enrichment in translation, carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism, genome maintenance, and cell envelope biogenesis. Additionally, CAZyme analysis indicated a high capacity for complex polysaccharide degradation, supporting efficient utilization of fiber-rich traditional diets. In conclusion, this study provides a comprehensive metagenomic overview of antibiotic resistance and functional potential in Kedu chicken gut microbiota, emphasizing the importance of incorporating indigenous poultry into antimicrobial resistance surveillance within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42736015	PubMed	2026	Concurrent detection of Leishmania infantum in dogs and Leishmania DNA in peridomestic sand fly pools from a coastal focus in Costa Rica. Canine visceral leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania infantum has recently been confirmed as autochthonous in Costa Rica, yet molecular evidence from peridomestic settings remains limited. We investigated dogs clinically suspected of leishmaniasis and screened phlebotomine sand flies collected in the same canine focus in Tamarindo (Guanacaste Province) between March and October 2025. Ten dogs were tested using a rapid serological assay and real-time PCR (qPCR) targeting kinetoplast minicircle DNA (kDNA); qPCR-positive samples were further assessed by PCR targeting the internal transcribed spacer 1 region (ITS-1 PCR) and sequencing for species confirmation. In parallel, female sand flies were morphologically identified, pooled by species/site/feeding status (2-11 per pool), and screened by kDNA qPCR; selected positive pools were evaluated by digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) to corroborate low-level detection. Blood-meal sources were investigated in qPCR-positive pools using host DNA markers. Four dogs were seropositive and qPCR-positive, and ITS-1 sequencing confirmed L. infantum in two cases, whereas other qPCR-positive dog samples did not yield ITS-1 amplicons, consistent with low parasite DNA loads. Forty-five female sand flies were collected and grouped into 13 pools; three pools (all composed of Lutzomyia serrana) were qPCR-positive near the detection limit, including one non-engorged pool, corroborated by ddPCR. Blood-meal analysis detected canine DNA in one positive pool and avian DNA in others. These findings document concurrent detection of canine L. infantum infection and Leishmania DNA in peridomestic sand fly pools from the same locality. Although the entomological findings should be interpreted cautiously due to low parasite DNA loads and the lack of species-level confirmation in sand flies, the results provide preliminary evidence consistent with local Leishmania circulation and support the need for integrated One Health surveillance of dogs and vectors in Costa Rica.
PUBMED_42772764	PubMed	2026	Controlling Varroa destructor infestations in managed honeybee colonies limits virus spillover into wild pollinator communities. Given recent pathogen-mediated pollinator declines, there is concern regarding virus spillover from managed honeybees to wild pollinators. While the parasitic mite Varroa destructor specializes on honeybees, the viruses it transmits are widespread throughout pollinator communities. Here, we investigated whether beekeeper control of varroa mites influences the magnitude of deformed wing virus (DWV) spillover into wild pollinators. We sampled 27 apiaries along a gradient of mite infestation, screening nearly 1000 pollinators and 350 flowers for DWV via quantitative PCR. We found that controlling varroa below the recommended treatment threshold reduced DWV loads in honeybees by over 100-fold. When varroa was controlled, DWV prevalence was reduced by over 35% on flowers and by 39%-85% in wild pollinators surrounding apiaries. These results demonstrate that sustainable beekeeping practices can limit viral spillover through the control of varroa mites, thereby safeguarding the health of both managed and wild pollinators alike.
PUBMED_42749892	PubMed	2026	Convergent use of aminopeptidase N receptor by hedgehog merbecoviruses. Coronaviruses circulating in wildlife, such as European and Asian hedgehog merbecoviruses (EriCoVs), pose a potential transmission risk. Knowledge of viral receptors can inform risk assessment and development of countermeasures; however, the functional receptor for EriCoVs is unknown. Here we identify hedgehog aminopeptidase N (APN) as a functional receptor for various EriCoVs. Analysis of APN orthologues from 93 species reveals a restricted APN tropism for EriCoVs, primarily utilizing APN from hedgehogs and to a lesser extent felid APN. Cryogenic electron microscopy analysis of the EriCoV-APN complex reveals an APN-binding mode that is distinct from those used by alpha- and deltacoronaviruses. Functional assays suggest that proteolytic activation of EriCoV spikes can be facilitated by multiple proteases in a context- and strain-dependent manner. Neutralizing antibodies targeting the EriCoV receptor-binding domain and hedgehog APN effectively blocked EriCoV pseudovirus entry or amplification. Receptor-binding-domain-targeting antibodies were further elucidated by cryogenic electron microscopy analysis. Together, these findings can inform assessment of merbecovirus spillover and pathogenesis.
PUBMED_42761556	PubMed	2026	Converging infectious disease threats in the post-COVID era: surveillance fragility, pandemic risk, and global preparedness. The COVID-19 pandemic exposed profound weaknesses in global infectious disease surveillance yet, in its aftermath, pandemic-prone threats have intensified rather than receded. This narrative review synthesizes contemporary evidence on three converging drivers of pandemic risk zoonotic emergence, antimicrobial resistance, and climate-sensitive disease expansion and examines how structural failures in surveillance and global health governance amplify their impact. Drawing on recent epidemiological analyses, policy reports, and One Health evaluations, the review maps post-COVID surges in zoonotic outbreaks, drug-resistant infections, and vector and water-borne diseases, and links these trends to fragmented laboratory networks, inequitable genomic capacity, and weak integration across human, animal, and environmental systems. It further interrogates the geopolitical and socioeconomic determinants of vulnerability, including conflict-related surveillance collapse, vaccine inequity, and the political economy of pandemic financing. Emerging digital tools from AI-enabled forecasting to wastewater and social media surveillance are assessed not only for their technical promise but also for risks related to data bias, extractives, and governance gaps. The review argues that without redistributive investment in One Health integration, regional genomic platforms, community-based surveillance, and enforceable IHR-based accountability, the world will continue to detect converging threats late and respond inequitably, leaving pandemic preparedness structurally fragile in the post-COVID era.
PUBMED_42741053	PubMed	2026	Cooperation or AI-driven self-reliance? Supplier channel exit decisions in live-streaming supply chain. As AI technology rapidly matures, suppliers are actively establishing self-operated AI-hosted channels while continuing to rely on MCN resale channels. The cross-channel traffic spillover effect and consumers' AI preference have intensified channel conflicts, prompting some suppliers to consider exiting MCN partnerships. To examine the feasibility of such supplier exit behavior, this paper develops a two-stage Stackelberg game model between the supplier and the MCN. The analysis reveals that channel exit disrupts the inherent zero-sum competitive relationship within the supply chain, and that different combinations of spillover intensity and consumer AI preference yield differentiated equilibrium outcomes. Interestingly, when consumers exhibit strong preference for AI streamers, the MCN instead benefits from enhanced sales profits. Moreover, consumer channel preference tends to compress consumer surplus; however, a multi-party win can be achieved when a strong spillover effect coincides with low-to-moderate consumer AI preference. This study provides theoretical guidance for suppliers' channel-exit decisions and MCNs' response strategies, and offers practical references for livestream market regulation.
PUBMED_42689357	PubMed	2026	Coordination mechanism for the benefits of joint recycling of small- and medium-scale livestock and poultry breeding waste. The participation of third-party companies in the recycling of livestock and poultry breeding waste (LPBW) is an effective way to solve the pollution problems of small- and medium-scale livestock and poultry farming. This article constructs a dynamic differential game model for LPBW recycling based on the differential game, which includes small and medium-scale livestock and poultry farmers (SM-LPF), third-party companies, and local governments in the same analytical framework, and introduces corporate social responsibility into the model. Four waste recycling scenarios, namely the no cost-sharing contract scenario, the polluter-pays scenario, the third-party pays scenario, and the centralized decision-making scenario, are considered, and the four scenarios are solved, analyzed, and simulated. The results show that: (1) in the absence of government subsidies, both polluter-pays contracts and third-party pays contracts are effective in increasing system utility and achieving pareto improvements. (2) The polluter pays contract is established on the premise that the environmental liability coefficient of the SM-LPF needs to reach a certain threshold, and the third-party pays for the recycling contract is established on the condition that the spillover effect of cleaner production reaches a certain threshold. (3) Government subsidies can provide incentives and coordinate the interests of the waste recycling system, and the size of the optimal subsidy coefficients of the government for the SM-LPF and the third-party firms is related to the positions of the two parties in the structure of the game. This study provides an important theoretical basis and practical guidance for promoting the recycling of LPBW.
PUBMED_42729870	PubMed	2026	Coronavirus surveillance in passerines reveals novel deltacoronaviruses in Eurasian tree sparrows with implications for One Health and livestock biosecurity. Coronaviruses (CoVs) are widespread RNA viruses infecting a broad range of avian and mammalian hosts. Although gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses (DCoVs) are common in wild birds, their presence in Eurasian passerines remains poorly understood. We screened 243 birds (35 species) at migratory stopover sites in Slovenia (2020-2021) using pan-coronavirus RT-PCR. Coronavirus RNA was detected only in four Eurasian Tree Sparrows (Passer montanus). Whole-genome sequencing yielded genomes of 26,017-26,018 bp with high internal conservation (99.95-99.98% identity). Phylogenetic analysis revealed notable evolutionary incongruence: isolates were highly related to porcine DCoVs in the ORF1ab region (95.6-96.1% amino acid identity) but clustered with divergent avian DCoVs in the spike gene (75.7-76.8% identity). RDP5 analysis provided strong evidence for a large-scale recombination event (p 1.17 10-43), consistent with a mosaic genomic architecture combining an ORF1ab region closely related to porcine DCoVs with an avian-associated spike gene. This genomic pattern highlights evolutionary connectivity among DCoVs associated with different host groups and the potential role of recombination in changes in host association. The synanthropic behaviour and mobility of P. montanus facilitate contact with diverse hosts, making this species relevant for investigating DCoV ecology at wildlife-livestock interfaces. These findings represent the first genomic characterisation of DCoVs in P. montanus in Europe and support the inclusion of passerines in broader coronavirus surveillance. Genomic surveillance of underrepresented wild-bird hosts can improve our understanding of DCoV diversity, recombination, and evolution across wildlife-livestock interfaces.
PUBMED_42693700	PubMed	2026	Correction to 'Determining the Environmental and Ecological Factors Associated With Poultry Farm Spillover of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (H5N1) in British Columbia, Canada'.
PUBMED_42781010	PubMed	2026	Correction: A systematic review and meta-analysis of population-based anthrax prevalence in Africa with a one health narrative synthesis of outbreak surveillance. This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2026.1792476. .
PUBMED_42687974	PubMed	2026	Cross-border introduction risk of Rift Valley fever virus: surveillance evidence from intercepted livestock in southwestern Saudi Arabia. INTRODUCTION: Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a mosquito-borne transboundary zoonotic disease with major implications for animal and public health. Following the 2000 outbreak in Saudi Arabia and Yemen, the risk of reintroduction through cross-border livestock movement remains a continuing concern. This study aimed to estimate the seroprevalence of Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) among illegally introduced livestock intercepted in the Jazan region of southwestern Saudi Arabia and to assess the added value of combined serological and molecular testing for detecting recent infection under routine surveillance conditions. METHODS: Cross-sectional study was conducted using routine diagnostic data from confiscated livestock intercepted between January 2017 and December 2019. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: A total of 2,202 serum samples from sheep, cattle, and camels were screened using a commercial competitive ELISA kit (ID.vet, France). Seroreactive samples were further characterized using IgM ELISA and real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Seroprevalence estimates were calculated with 95% confidence intervals (CI) and by species and year of collection. Agreement between IgM ELISA and RT-PCR was evaluated using Cohen's kappa coefficient. Overall, 38 of 2,202 samples were cELISA-positive, giving an RVFV seroprevalence of 1.7% (95% CI: 1.3-2.4). Of the Seroreactive samples, 6/38 (15.8%; 95% CI: 7.4-30.4) were IgM-positive, indicating recent infection. Three samples were RT-PCR-confirmed, and all molecularly confirmed cases were also IgM-positive. Agreement between IgM and PCR was moderate ( 0.62). Seroprevalence was higher in sheep than cattle, but without statistical significance (OR 1.61; 95% CI: 0.82-3.17; p 0.190). These findings provide surveillance-based evidence of RVFV exposure and recent infection among livestock intercepted at a high-risk border interface. They support illegal cross-border livestock movement as a potential pathway for RVFV introduction, while not establishing the geographic source or transmission route. Strengthening integrated laboratory surveillance, border biosecurity, and One Health coordination is essential for early detection and risk reduction.
PUBMED_42769611	PubMed	2026	Cultural practices, wildlife trade dynamics, and climate-migration interactions: an integrated one health approach to reducing zoonotic spillover risks in Africa. The drivers causing spillovers of zoonotic diseases in Africa are multifaceted and include cultural and traditional wildlife practices, illegal trade channels, environmental factors driven by climate change, and human migration. These drivers have been assessed separately in various reviews, and no synthesis has integrated all four within a unified multistage zoonotic spillover framework in Southern Africa, West, and Central Africa. This narrative review explores how cultural practices, the trading of wildlife, climatic changes, and forced human migration contribute to the zoonotic spillover risks. The literature search was conducted with PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus, Web of Science, and Google Scholar databases between the years 1990 and 2026 using a structured search strategy. Bushmeat consumption, zootherapeutic practices, and wildlife trade create direct and sustained wildlife-human contact pathways, with zootherapeutic handling chains being the most poorly monitored exposure pathway. Climate-induced range shifts and habitat loss are increasing reservoir host distribution into human-adjacent environments, and climate-induced migration is moving reservoir populations to new areas without known exposure norms. Collectively, this evidence suggests that these drivers do not work in isolation at their intersections, creating compounding risks that cannot be solved by a single-domain intervention. We present this as an interpretive synthesis of the evidence reviewed, not a directly tested findings. Three documented areas highlight the need for strengthening the current implementation of One Health: enforcement measures that push trade into clandestine channels, underfunded wildlife surveillance, and the lack of community knowledge systems in the approach to designing surveillance. Women in urban bushmeat retail, a structurally high-exposure population, remain absent from formal serological surveillance programs. On the basis of these documented gaps, the review recommends redesigning surveillance for the prevention of zoonotic spillover, including sentinel systems in Sahelian and forest-margin areas linked to climate. Structural One Health governance reform will also be needed to implement these priorities, namely, incorporating community knowledge systems, climate, and migration data into national surveillance systems.
PUBMED_42779238	PubMed	2026	Current status of brucellosis control programmes and Chinese path based on the One Health concept: a review . Brucellosis is one of the most widespread zoonoses globally, which poses serious threats to both global public health and development of animal husbandry. Conventional brucellosis control measures suffer problems of surveillance coordination, regional joint prevention, and policy implementation, which are insufficient to address the challenges of ecological risks and crosshost transmission. The One Health approach allocates interdisciplinary and intersectoral collaborations to achieve systemic health of humans, animals, and environments, which provides new insights into brucellosis control programmes. This review describes the pathogenic biological characteristics, global epidemiological landscape, and transmission ecology of brucellosis, evaluates the main limitations of current control strategies, summarizes the experiences from successful One Health practices across countries at different stages of development, and proposes the brucellosis control strategy based on the One Health concept with adaptations to the current epidemiology of brucellosis in China, so as to provide the theoretical evidence and practical framework for the national brucellosis control programmes in China, thereby facilitating the effective control and the ultimate elimination of brucellosis.
PUBMED_42698579	PubMed	2026	Decoding the functional diversity of plant growth-promoting bacterial communities in the soils of Western Ghats, Tamil Nadu, India. Western ghats in India, one of the world's biodiversity hot spots is the reservoirs of microbial resources having agricultural and industrial significance. However, the diversity of plant growth-promoting microbial communities associated with the plants and soil in the Western Ghats is untapped vault. The current emphasis on natural farming is more depending on the indigenous microbial communities and their metabolic functions towards sustainable one -health. With this background, the present study examines the bacterial diversity of soils from the Western Ghats of Nilgiris, Coimbatore and Dindigul regions. Among the 10 soil samples collected (S1 to S10), three soil samples (S2, S4 and S6) representing respective three regions were subjected for metagenomic studies based on their distinct soil chemical and biological properties. The computational analysis of the metagenome revealed the core genus Bradhyrhizobium in all soil samples, while Trebonia, Arthrobacter, Streptomyces, and Pseudomonas are the next most abundant genera, which varied substantially. The results collectively demonstrate that soil sample from Dindigul harbours the richest and most diverse microbial community among the three regions. In culturable studies, a total of 101 bacterial isolates were obtained from 10 soil samples (S1 to S10). Among them four Gram-negative bacterial isolates showed potential plant growth-promoting attributes, such as Ammonia, Indole Acetic Acid, Hydrogen cyanide and siderophore production, phosphorus, potassium, and zinc solubilization. The 16S rDNA analysis revealed that the bacterial isolates were Pseudomonas glycinae S6B1, Pseudomonas tolaasii S2B3, Pseudomonas azotoformans S9H10, and Pseudomonas poae S10B2. The isolate, S10B2, exhibited the maximum inhibition, with 81.25%, 70.1%, and 35% against plant pathogenic fungi, Rhizoctonia solani, Sclerotium rolfsii, and Fusarium oxysporum, respectively, indicating strong biocontrol potential. The effect of bacterial inoculants on chick pea (Cicer arietinum var. JG 62), showed that P. glycinae S6B1 significantly promoted plant growth such as root length, shoot length, and fresh/dry biomass. These findings unlock the core microbiome of soils of Western Ghats, which can be utilized to develop a synthetic microbial consortium to boost agricultural productivity.
PUBMED_42689822	PubMed	2026	Deriving Antibiotic Thresholds Under a One Health Framework: Integrating Bioaccumulation and Human Exposure in the Yangtze River Estuary Food Web. Antibiotics are widely detected in aquatic environments, yet current environmental thresholds rarely integrate ecological and human health risks under a One Health framework. Here, we developed a bioaccumulation- and human exposure-based approach to derive health-protective environmental thresholds for antibiotics in the Yangtze River Estuary (YRE). Total antibiotic concentrations averaged 6.64 5.91 ng/L in water, 9.65 7.55 ng/g in sediment, and 56.4 80.9 ng/g in aquatic organisms, with significant cross-compartmental variability and distinct compositional patterns among environmental matrices. Chloramphenicol (CAP) exhibited the strongest bioaccumulation potential (BCF up to 20,190 L/g) and was the only compound showing trophic magnification (TMF 2.97), whereas most other antibiotics displayed trophic dilution. Derived thresholds ranged from 2.04 10-5-434 ng/L for water and 3.01 10-4-17.0 ng/g for sediment, several orders of magnitude lower than thresholds derived using traditional ecotoxicity-based approaches in previous studies. CAP, norfloxacin, and ofloxacin were identified as priority risk compounds, demonstrating that even moderate environmental concentrations can bioaccumulate through aquatic food webs and pose notable dietary exposure risks to consumers. This framework provides a more protective basis for antibiotic pollution management and environmental standard development under a One Health perspective.
PUBMED_42727236	PubMed	2026	Detection and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of Salmonella enterica subsp. arizonae and Proteus spp. associated with gastrointestinal disease in rescued hedgehogs (Erinaceus europaeus). Western European hedgehogs (Erinaceus europaeus) are frequently admitted to wildlife rehabilitation centres, where infectious diseases may affect recovery and raise One Health concerns. This study aimed to identify bacterial isolates recovered from hedgehog samples submitted for suspected gastrointestinal infection and to characterise their antimicrobial susceptibility profiles. Five bacterial isolates were analysed using the MicroScan WalkAway Plus system with the Neg-Urine-Combo 98 panel, and the results were interpreted in accordance with EUCAST guidelines. The identified bacteria included one isolate of Salmonella enterica subsp. arizonae, three isolates of Proteus mirabilis and one isolate of Proteus penneri. The Salmonella enterica subsp. arizonae isolate was susceptible to all antimicrobials for which a valid result was obtained. Proteus spp. isolates were susceptible to cefotaxime, nalidixic acid, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, norfloxacin, amikacin, gentamicin, tobramycin, aztreonam, cefoxitin, ceftazidime and fosfomycin. However, resistance was observed to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, ampicillin, ertapenem, meropenem, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, cefuroxime, piperacillin-tazobactam, colistin and nitrofurantoin, with the latter two showing resistance in all Proteus spp. The Proteus penneri isolate displayed the broadest resistance profile, including resistance to several -lactams, carbapenems. As expected, all Proteus spp. showed intrinsic non-susceptibility to colistin and nitrofurantoin. Although the Salmonella enterica subsp. arizonae isolate was susceptible to the tested agents, Proteus spp. from hedgehog samples may display relevant antimicrobial resistance (AMR) patterns. Therefore, continuous bacteriological monitoring and antimicrobial susceptibility testing are important in wildlife rehabilitation settings to guide treatment decisions and support One Health surveillance.
PUBMED_42685537	PubMed	2026	Detection of Ehrlichia spp., Candidatus Neoehrlichia sp. (FU98) and Anaplasma phagocytophilum in red foxes (Vulpes vulpes) in Germany. Vector-borne diseases pose a growing challenge to public health. Effective surveillance, interdisciplinary cooperation in line with the One Health approach, and prevention and control strategies are therefore essential to reduce the risk of future outbreaks and burden of disease in the long term. Identifying and investigating sentinels can help in this regard. In this study, 537 red fox (vulpes) spleen samples from three regions in Germany (Berlin, Brandenburg, Arnsberg administrative region) were tested for Anaplasmataceae and Rickettsia spp. using PCR. Only 3% of the samples (n 15) tested positive for Anaplasmataceae. Candidatus Neoehrlichia sp. (FU98) was detected most frequently (1.7%; n 9), followed by Anaplasma phagocytophilum (0.9%, n 5) and a previously undescribed Ehrlichia sp. genotype (0.4%; n 2). Rickettsia spp. were not detected. To our knowledge, this is the first finding of Candidatus Neoehrlichia sp. (FU98) in Germany, and our study has also revealed the presence of a previously unknown Ehrlichia species (Ehrlichia sp. ex European carnivore) that is not closely related to E. canis. Anaplasma phagocytophilum was detected in all three regions at low prevalence. Candidatus Neoehrlichia sp. (FU98) in Berlin and Brandenburg but not in Arnsberg. Further studies are necessary to isolate this new agent, as well as to investigate its geographic distribution and host range. Sequences representing an unknown Ehrlichia species were found in one fox sample each in Berlin and Brandenburg. Further investigations are needed regarding its phylogenetic position, vector and host affiliation.
PUBMED_42736007	PubMed	2026	Detection of Spirometra sp. (Cestoda: Diphyllobothriidae) eggs and morphological characterization of adult specimens from free-living wild carnivores in Paraguay. Pseudophilid cestodes the genus Spirometra can infect a wide range of intermediate hosts in larval stages, while adult stages parasitize domestic animals, wildlife, and humans. In South America, descriptions of adults in wildlife are scarce. This study reports the presence of Spirometra sp. eggs in three species of wild carnivores from Paraguay (Chrysocyon brachyurus, Leopardus geoffroyi and Procyon cancrivorus), and microscopic characterization of a recovered adult specimen from L. geoffroyi. Fecal samples were examined using conventional methods, revealing eggs compatible with Spirometra sp., in all three hosts. The adult cestode was processed by basic fuchsin staining for morphological analysis of the complete preparation. General characteristics confirmed the identification at a genus level. These findings represent the first microscopic description of adult Spirometra from wild carnivores in Paraguay and provide baseline anatomical data for future taxonomic and epidemiological studies, highlighting the relevance of wildlife reservoirs within the One Health framework.
PUBMED_42688411	PubMed	2026	Detection of TR34/L98H pan-azole-resistant Aspergillus fumigatus in poultry farm environments. INTRODUCTION: Poultry farms have been recognized as environments prone to fungal contamination. However, the occurrence of azole-resistant Aspergillus fumigatus and its cytotoxic potential remain insufficiently characterized. This study aimed to characterize the occurrence, cytotoxic potential, and azole-resistance profile ofAspergillus section Fumigati in poultry farms. METHODS: A total of 420 samples, including air (n 47), electrostatic dust cloths (n 87), bedding (n 87), feed (n 95), swabs (n 87), workers' masks (n 2), and broiler breast (n 15), were obtained. Fungal characterization was performed through culture-based methods (27 C and 37 C), followed by azole resistance screening according to EUCAST guidelines. Resistant isolates were subjected to whole-genome sequencing and a targeted analysis of cyp51A mutations. The cytotoxicity potential of fungal isolates and environmental samples was evaluated using selected cell lines representing respiratory organs (human alveolar A549 ) and detoxification organs (swinekidney SK /hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 ). RESULTS: Seven putative Aspergillus fumigatus isolates exhibited pan-azole resistance (MICs: 2 mg/L ITR/VOR; 1mg/L for POS). Four isolates carried the TR34/L98H mutation and were recovered from bedding (n 3) and air (n 1), suggesting the presence of resistant A. fumigatus in poultry farm matrices. Although 12% of isolates induced toxicity on both cell lines (17/145), no significant association was observed between isolate cytotoxicity and environmental sample toxicity, suggesting that additional biological and chemical components may contribute to the overall toxicological profile of farm environments. DISCUSION: The study highlights the occurrence of azole-resistant A. fumigatus in poultry farms and support integrated surveillance approaches addressing antifungal resistance and environmental exposure risks in poultry production.
PUBMED_42701398	PubMed	2026	Detection of livestock-associated MRSA ST398/t011 and hospital-associated MRSA ST239/t037 in a referral hospital in northeastern Iran: A six-month cross-sectional surveillance study (July-December 2025). BACKGROUND: Following initial detection of livestock-associated MRSA (LA-MRSA) ST398/t011 and hospital-associated MRSA (HA-MRSA) ST239/t037 in early 2025, we conducted a cross-sectional six-month surveillance study to determine whether these clones represent transient introductions or continued detection in a referral hospital in Bojnurd, North Khorasan Province, northeastern Iran. METHODS: From July to December 2025, we collected 258 consecutive clinical specimens at Imam Reza Hospital, Bojnurd. MRSA isolates underwent antimicrobial susceptibility testing, SCCmec typing, spa typing, and multilocus sequence typing. PCR detected genes encoding Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL), toxic shock syndrome toxin (TSST-1), and other virulence factors. Livestock exposure was defined using a structured questionnaire. RESULTS: Among 61 S. aureus isolates (23.6%), 11 (18.0%) were MRSA, all belonging exclusively to two previously identified clones: ST398/t011/SCCmec V/agr I (n 6; 54.5%) and ST239/t037/SCCmec III/agr I (n 5; 45.5%). Resistance patterns remained clone-specific, with all ST398 isolates resistant to tetracycline and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. The PVL gene was detected in one ST398 isolate (16.7%). All ST239 isolates carried tst and sec. Livestock exposure was reported in 83.3% of ST398-infected patients. Clinically, all 11 patients survived; only one required ICU admission, and none experienced treatment failure. CONCLUSION: This study documents continued detection of LA-MRSA ST398/t011 at a referral hospital in Bojnurd, co-circulating with endemic HA-MRSA ST239/t037. The detection of a PVL-positive ST398 isolate warrants further investigation and underscores the importance of integrated One Health surveillance. Given the small sample size (n 11), these findings are descriptive and hypothesis-generating rather than confirmatory.
PUBMED_42752865	PubMed	2026	Detection of monkeypox virus in persons presenting skin lesions; benefits of One Health in passive surveillance. Mpox is a zoonosis caused by monkeypox virus (MPXV). Cases in Nigeria have risen to endemic status wherein infected persons seeking ethnoveterinary solution approached the Dermatophilosis Centre of the National Veterinary Research Institute. Of the 110 skin lesions seen in 2025, 6 had maculopapular rash suggestive of mpox. These and environmental samples collected in the household of an individual were analysed for generic orthopoxvirus and MPXV-specific antigens by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Two skin and four environmental samples were orthopoxvirus and MPXV positive. These cases were referred to the Plateau State Ministry of Health for management. No further complication was observed at follow-up and these experiences underscored the benefit of One Health in passive surveillance at health and allied facilities.
PUBMED_42714937	PubMed	2026	Detection of opportunistic bacterial pathogens with intrinsic amoxicillin- and cephalosporin-resistance in wild koala faecal microbiomes. Opportunistic bacterial pathogens frequently associated with human clinical infections, including antimicrobial-resistant strains, are infiltrating the microbiomes of wild animals, where they have the potential to negatively impact wildlife health. Bacterial genes conferring resistance to amoxicillin have previously been reported in koala (Phascolarctos cinereus) faecal DNA. Koalas are facing several key threats, including wildfires, and affected individuals may receive amoxicillin therapy to treat burn wounds. This study aimed to identify the species of amoxicillin-resistant bacteria in koala gut microbiomes and determine if they are opportunistic pathogens. Faecal samples collected from 98 wild-caught koalas were cultured using amoxicillin-supplemented media to isolate amoxicillin-resistant Gram-negative enteric bacteria. Isolates were screened using 16S rRNA PCR and Sanger sequencing to identify opportunistic pathogenic species, which then underwent whole-genome sequencing and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. Intrinsically amoxicillin-resistant opportunistic pathogens were obtained from 9.2% (9/98) of koala faecal samples and comprised Klebsiella oxytoca (6/98, 6.1%), Klebsiella pneumoniae (1/98, 1.0%) and Citrobacter spp. (2/98, 2.0%). Seven of nine amoxicillin-resistant opportunistic pathogens also exhibited cephalosporin resistance. Four K. oxytoca isolates belonged to lineages associated with human clinical infections, which also have the potential to cause disease in koalas, including fatal systemic infections in pouch young. The presence of amoxicillin- and cephalosporin-resistant strains may also increase the risk of gut dysbiosis and opportunistic infections when penicillins or cephalosporins are required to treat bacterial infections in koalas, highlighting the importance of good antimicrobial stewardship. The study findings demonstrate the One Health perspective of microbial pathogens and the intertwined microbial ecology between humans and wildlife.
PUBMED_42720246	PubMed	2026	Development and Epitope Characterization of Monoclonal Antibodies Targeting the Rabies Virus P Protein. Rabies is a fatal zoonotic disease caused by rabies virus (RABV), resulting in approximately 59,000 deaths annually worldwide and posing a serious threat to public health. The RABV phosphoprotein (P protein) plays crucial roles in viral replication, transcription, and immune antagonism; however, its immunogenic properties have not been fully characterized. In this study, the RABV P protein was expressed in an Escherichia coli expression system and used to immunize mice, resulting in the generation of six P protein-specific monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). Using an overlapping peptide-based truncation strategy, two linear B-cell epitopes were identified: 52DMKRLHLDDEKSSNL66 and 177VAPGPPALEWSATNE191. Alanine-scanning mutagenesis revealed that residues D52, M53, R55, L56, and L58 were critical for the recognition of epitope 52DMKRLHLDDEKSSNL66 by mAbs 2D2 and 18G7. Residues G180, P181, and W186 were essential for recognition of epitope 177VAPGPPALEWSATNE191 by mAbs 3D7, 15D8, 16D3, and 16C6. Notably, although some amino acid residues within epitopes P1-5 and P4-2 exhibited high variability among representative RABV strains, the critical residues recognized by these monoclonal antibodies were highly conserved. These findings provide new insights into the antigenic structure of the RABV P protein and may contribute to future studies on its functional characterization, as well as the development of P protein-based diagnostic reagents and subunit vaccines.
PUBMED_42756578	PubMed	2026	Development and Implementation of a One Health Point of Entry Checklist in Iraq and Jordan. INTRODUCTION: Points of entry (POEs) serve as critical hubs in national security efforts, facilitating trade and travel while mitigating threats such as transboundary zoonotic diseases. Given the multisectoral nature of One Health (OH) challenges at POEs, there is a need for a systematic tool to assess preparedness and response capabilities. Existing evaluation frameworks, such as the International Health Regulations (IHR) Monitoring and Evaluation Framework and the World Organisation for Animal Health Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) Pathway, lack comprehensive OH-specific guidance tailored to POEs. METHODS: To address this gap, we developed and piloted an OH POE Checklist, an assessment tool designed to evaluate human, animal and environmental health capacities at land border crossings and international airports. Collaborating with stakeholders from Iraq and Jordan, we conducted pilot assessments of the checklist at the Trebil, Karameh and Jaber land border points as well as at Baghdad International and Queen Alia International airports. RESULTS: The Checklist, structured under the Prevent, Detect, Respond and Evaluate framework, was mapped against existing health security evaluation tools, demonstrating 68% alignment (100/148 indicators) across key indicators from State Party Self-Assessment Annual Reporting, Joint External Evaluation, PVS and IHR POE Annex. Recommendations from these pilots highlighted the need to add questions on methods of international communication between border officials and create a version suitable for mobile-phone completion. Additionally, the pilot highlighted the need to incorporate a secondary evaluation by national and local authorities and broaden the scope to encompass deliberate event competencies. CONCLUSIONS: This study outlines the development, implementation and refinement of the OH POE Checklist, contributing to the integration of OH principles into border security and public health preparedness.
PUBMED_42761239	PubMed	2026	Developmental ecology of the infant oral ecosystem: a framework for early childhood caries. BACKGROUND: Early childhood caries (ECC) has traditionally been regarded as a biofilm-mediated disease driven by sugar exposure and acidogenic microorganisms. However, this perspective primarily captures the final stage of a much longer biological process. We propose the Developmental Ecology of the Infant Oral Ecosystem as a conceptual framework in which ECC represents the clinical manifestation of a disrupted developmental ecology of the infant oral ecosystem, resulting from altered host-microbe-environment interactions that operate from the prenatal period through the first 1,000 days of life with maternal, nutritional, inflammatory, immune, metabolic, microbial, and environmental influences shaping early developmental trajectories. METHODS: This narrative review synthesizes current evidence into an integrated developmental ecological framework encompassing maternal microbial transmission, infant oral microbiome assembly, breastfeeding, complementary feeding, dietary ecology, tooth eruption, biofilm maturation, and the oral-gut axis. These processes are interpreted within the One Health and Developmental Origins of Health and Disease (DOHaD) paradigms to provide a comprehensive ecological perspective on ECC development. FINDINGS: The reviewed evidence supports a developmental-ecological interpretation in which interconnected early-life ecological processes shape microbial succession, oral ecosystem resilience, and susceptibility to dysbiosis. Rather than acting as the primary cause of disease, the cariogenic biofilm is interpreted within the proposed framework as the ecological endpoint of disrupted developmental trajectories that impair the establishment and maintenance of oral homeostasis. CONCLUSIONS: Reframing ECC as a developmental ecological disorder complements established preventive approaches, including fluoride use, dietary sugar control, oral hygiene, and regular dental care, while highlighting the importance of maternal health, early-life nutritional ecology, and microbiome-informed preventive strategies aimed at preserving oral ecosystem resilience from the earliest stages of life. The proposed framework is intended to generate testable hypotheses for future longitudinal and interventional research.
PUBMED_42679837	PubMed	2026	Direct and spillover hospitalisation patterns during climate hazards across regions of different health-system resilience levels in China: a nationwide retrospective analysis. BACKGROUND: Health-system resilience serves as a key contributor in mitigating adverse health impacts during climate hazards. However, quantitative insights into resilience-associated health-care utilisation patterns and targeted adaptation policies remain scarce. We aimed to capture the spatiotemporal health impacts in disaster-exposed counties and their neighbouring counties in China during storms, floods, tropical cyclones, and blizzards or winter storms; understand the association between health-system resilience metrics and hazard-attributable hospitalisations; and develop evidence-based adaptation policies towards climate extremes. METHODS: In this retrospective, observational analysis of county-level aggregated hospitalisation data, we used a propensity score matching-difference-in-differences framework to assess the spatiotemporal changes of nine types of disease-specific hospitalisations in both disaster-exposed and neighbouring regions during storms, floods, tropical cyclones, and blizzards in China. We quantified the relative importance and health gains of health-system metrics during such hazards through random forest approach with interpretable partial dependence plots to derive evidence-based adaptation recommendations. FINDINGS: We included hospitalisation data from Jan 1, 2016 to Dec 31, 2023. In this period, 3241 county-hazard event combinations and 41 747 482 hospitalisations were recorded across 955 Chinese counties. The disaster-exposed regions experienced an initial decline in hospitalisation rates, followed by admission surges after disasters. For example, infectious disease admissions decreased by 11 92% (95% CI -10 53 to -13 31) during the flood-active period but increased by 7 68% (6 46-8 91) after 1-2 weeks of floods. Neighbouring zones were also affected through spillover effects, with infectious disease admissions increasing by 3 18% (1 76-4 61) after 1-2 weeks of the floods. Cardiovascular disease, injuries, infectious, respiratory, and mental disorders were more sensitive across all regions. Particularly for disaster-exposed counties, cardiovascular hospitalisations increased by 14 31% (7 34-21 29) during the tropical cyclone-active period. Notably, compared with low-resilience counties, high-resilience counties were associated with 19 48-30 03% smaller hazard-related relative changes in hospitalisation rates during the hazard-active period and 27 07-31 08% smaller hazard-related relative changes in hospitalisation rates in post-hazard periods. For instance, during the storm-active period, the increase in respiratory hospitalisations was 7 21% (0 67-13 75) in high-resilience counties versus 12 13% (5 20-19 05) in low-resilience counties. Health workforce (relative importance 14 58% during the hazard-active period and 13 80% during the post-hazard period) and service delivery (14 10% during the hazard-active period and 14 17% during the post-hazard period) were identified as key contributors of health-system resilience. Empirical synergistic effects were observed when combining interventions during the post-hazard period, with the combined effect of service delivery (individual contribution 8%) and workforce (individual contribution 4%) exceeding the sum of their individual contributions (16% reduction in cumulative excess admissions) by 33%. INTERPRETATION: Climate hazards are associated with substantial changes in hospitalisation rates in both disaster-exposed and neighbouring regions. Health-system resilience is essential in addressing disaster-health challenges. Targeted adaptation interventions should be context-appropriate and threshold-aware, thereby maximising the public health benefits relative to resilience-oriented investments in health systems. FUNDING: Gates Foundation and the National Natural Science Foundation of China.
PUBMED_42740829	PubMed	2027	Directed biosynthesis of the designer peptidyl nucleoside antibiotics featuring a simplified azetidine-containing moiety. Fungal and fungal-like pathogen infections pose escalating threats to the global one-health, thus underscoring the urgent need to reverse this trend by accelerating the development of novel antifungal drugs. Polyoxin (POL), a group of structurally related nucleoside antibiotics, is an eco-friendly fungicide targeting fungal cell wall biosynthesis. However, the chemical diversity and therapeutic potential of this antibiotic has remained underexplored. Here, we report the rational design of a series of POL analogs that feature a simplified azetidine-containing moiety, and we have further realized the directed biosynthesis of them using an industrial POL producer as cell factory. Notably, three analogs (POL-AX, POL-HX, and POL-KX), featuring a l-A2CA (l-azetidine-2-carboxylic acid) moiety, exhibit enhanced inhibitory activity against Candida albicans and even the oomycete plant pathogen Phytophthora sojae. Moreover, systematic molecular docking analyses reveal that the three POL analogs can be better accommodated to the active pocket of the chitin synthases, directly contributing to the improved inhibitory activity of the designer POL analogs. The study provides the basis for the rational access of next-generation agents targeting chitin biosynthesis.
PUBMED_42764961	PubMed	2026	Directions for Establishing a Korean National One Health Joint Plan of Action: Focusing on Zoonotic Disease Preparedness and Response. OBJECTIVES: This study proposes directions for establishing a Korean National One Health Joint Plan of Action to address health threats arising from complex interactions among humans, animals, and the environment, with a particular focus on zoonotic disease preparedness and response. METHODS: This study analyzed the six Action Tracks outlined in the One Health Joint Plan of Action proposed by the Quadripartite organizations, comprising the World Health Organization, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, World Organization for Animal Health, and United Nations Environment Programme. Considering the domestic administrative structures and institutional context of the Republic of Korea (ROK), this study focused on Action Tracks 2 and 3, which are directly associated with zoonotic disease preparedness, prevention, and response. RESULTS: This study demonstrated that responses to zoonotic and vector-borne diseases should move beyond traditional single-sector approaches and evolve into integrated response models based on multisectoral collaborative governance, interconnected surveillance systems linking human, animal, and environmental sectors, and community-based risk management frameworks. Furthermore, the proposed implementation directions provide an institutional foundation for transforming the current response system from a reactive, post-event framework into a preventive and risk-based management system. CONCLUSIONS: This study contextualized the international One Health Joint Plan of Action within the ROK's domestic zoonotic disease response framework. The proposed implementation strategies may provide policy evidence for establishing a national One Health governance framework that integrates prevention, early detection, and risk management through coordinated intersectoral roles and institutional collaboration.
PUBMED_42777545	PubMed	2026	Disposable label-free electrochemical immunosensor using hollow porous gold sub-microcubes with surface-confined ferrocene for point-of-care detection of Mpox virus A29 protein. Monkeypox (Mpox), a viral zoonotic disease caused by the monkeypox virus (MPXV) remains a significant global public health concern. Current laboratory diagnostics are limited by high biosafety requirements and complex workflows, preventing point-of-care (POC) use. To address these limitations, a disposable, label-free electrochemical immunosensor was developed to detect the MPXV A29 glycoprotein, a highly immunogenic and diagnostically relevant protein. Shape-controlled, reproducible, hollow porous gold sub-microcubes (HPGCs) were synthesized using AgCl as a sacrificial template. The screen-printed carbon electrode was functionalized with poly-l-cysteine and HPGCs bearing a surface-confined 6-(ferrocenyl)hexanethiol probe and antibody for selective antigen binding. Antigen binding attenuates the ferrocene electrochemistry, investigated by voltammetry and impedance spectroscopy. The high surface-to-volume ratio and electrocatalytically active centers of HPGCs enable high loading of ferrocene and antibodies. The surface-confined signaling probe eliminates the need for an external signaling probe, offering a portable, reagent-free POC testing. The sensor offers a wide linear range (0.1-3200 ng/mL), low detection limit (0.1 ng/mL), excellent selectivity against non-target proteins, high reproducibility (RSD 3.73%), and strong recovery in spiked serum with minimal matrix effects. These findings demonstrate a robust, sensitive, and user-friendly diagnostic strategy for field-based Mpox surveillance in resource-limited settings.
PUBMED_42760518	PubMed	2026	Divergent host adaptation in Marburg virus: a hypothesis-generating framework for prioritizing non-traditional reservoirs. BACKGROUND: Although Rousettus aegyptiacus is the primary natural reservoir of Marburg virus (MARV), recent atypical outbreaks and viral genomic diversification suggest a highly complex host-pathogen ecology. Here, we systematically evaluated the molecular homologies between MARV and diverse mammalian taxa to identify putative reservoir hosts and guide targeted surveillance. METHODS: A multi-dimensional molecular characterization of the Marburg virus (MARV) genome was performed using an integrative suite of computational approaches. Distant sequence homology was interrogated via BLAST in conjunction with a null model framework, supplemented by granular analyses of codon usage bias, nucleotide composition, and dinucleotide frequencies. For comparative genomic context, we evaluated a cohort of 63 mammalian species across the orders Rodentia, Primates, Chiroptera, and Perissodactyla. RESULTS: Multidimensional molecular profiling showed varied genomic similarity between MARV and mammalian groups, with stable convergence observed in Perissodactyla and certain rodents across multiple codon usage indices. Notably, the effective number of codons (ENC) in Equus caballus (52.43) nearly matched MARV (52.44), and Equus asinus exhibited the lowest average RSCU Manhattan distance to the virus (0.25). Additionally, MARV's CpG suppression ( Formula: see text 0.48) was consistent with the CpG depletion levels characteristic of the studied mammalian taxa. CONCLUSION: Through the lens of computational biology, this study identifies putative host cohorts within the orders Perissodactyla and Rodentia that share distinct genomic, codon-usage, and dinucleotide-frequency homologies with MARV. These findings establish high-priority targets for downstream ecological field monitoring, seroepidemiological surveys, and experimental validation, ultimately providing a scientific blueprint to refine zoonotic surveillance networks under the global 'One Health' paradigm.
PUBMED_42787851	PubMed	2026	Diverse Kinetoplastida detected in fecal samples from wild non-human primates across three African regions. BACKGROUND: The order Kinetoplastida comprises medically important parasites as well as numerous non-trypanosomatid lineages whose diversity and ecology remain poorly understood. Although studies in non-human primates (NHPs) have mainly focused on pathogenic trypanosomatids, little is known about the broader diversity of Kinetoplastida associated with wildlife. The present study aimed to characterize the diversity of Kinetoplastida detected in wild NHPs across Africa. METHODS: We analyzed 884 fecal samples collected from wild NHPs in three African countries (Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of the Congo and Senegal). Following nucleic acid extraction, samples were screened for Kinetoplastida using a broad-range quantitative PCR targeting the 28S rRNA gene. Positive samples were subjected to conventional PCR, sequencing and phylogenetic analysis. RESULTS: Kinetoplastida DNA was detected in 88 fecal samples from all study sites, with detection frequencies varying from 3.69% in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to 16.24% in the Republic of the Congo and 34.78% in Senegal. Phylogenetic analyses revealed a broad diversity of kinetoplastid lineages, predominantly affiliated with bodonid-related taxa, including clades closely related to Bodo saltans, Parabodo nitrophilus and Neobodo spp. One sequence clustered within a clade closely related to Dimastigella trypaniformis, whereas another group of sequences formed a clade related to Parabodo caudatus. A limited number of sequences also showed phylogenetic proximity to Trypanosomatidae lineages related to Trypanosoma, Leishmania and Leptomonas. CONCLUSIONS: This study expands current knowledge of the diversity of Kinetoplastida detected in fecal samples from wild NHPs and highlights the value of non-invasive molecular approaches for investigating protist diversity in wildlife. The detection of Trypanosomatidae-related lineages in fecal samples represents an uncommon finding that deserves further investigation. Further studies combining complementary sample types, strain isolation and additional molecular approaches are needed to better understand the ecological significance of the detected lineages and their relationships with vertebrate hosts.
PUBMED_42722224	PubMed	2026	Does Trypanosoma infection affect body condition in bats? A study from Atlantic Forest in southern Bahia, Brazil. Bats harbor a remarkable diversity of trypanosomatids and are key hosts in the evolutionary history of the Trypanosoma cruzi clade. However, the effects of these infections on bat biology remain poorly explored, particularly in human-modified Neotropical landscapes. This study investigated the species diversity of Trypanosoma in bats from a shaded cacao agroforestry system within the Atlantic Forest of southern Bahia, Brazil, and evaluated the association between infection and body condition in Carollia perspicillata, the most abundant species sampled. A total of 153 bats representing 14 species and 2 families were captured, and 135 blood samples were screened by nested PCR targeting 18S rDNA. Twenty-eight individuals (20.7%) tested positive, representing four host species. Sequencing and phylogenetic analyses identified three lineages, Trypanosoma sp. Neobat 1, Trypanosoma sp. Neobat 4, and T. dionisii. These findings represent the first records of these taxa in bats from the state of Bahia, expanding the known geographic distribution of these trypanosomatids. Infection was most frequent in C. perspicillata (22.7%), which also harbored the greatest diversity of Trypanosoma lineages. Infected C. perspicillata exhibited significantly lower body condition than uninfected individuals, indicating that Trypanosoma infection is associated with measurable physiological costs in this host species. Nevertheless, the moderate magnitude of this difference is consistent with a long-term host-parasite association in which chronic infections may persist without overt pathological effects. The occurrence of multiple Trypanosoma lineages in sympatric bat species further highlights the ecological role of bats in maintaining trypanosome diversity within agroforestry landscapes. These results reinforce the importance of integrating bat health metrics with molecular surveillance under a One Health framework to improve our understanding of bat-trypanosome interactions in human-modified ecosystems.
PUBMED_42748189	PubMed	2026	Does rural talent cultivation enhance farmers' social capital? Evidence from the 'One Village, One University Student' project. Using the One Village, One University Student (OVOUS) project as an example and drawing on survey data from 2,552 farmers in 12 counties (county-level cities/districts) in Jiangxi Province, China, this study employs an endogenous switching probit (ESP) model to empirically examine whether participation in rural revitalization talent-training programs enhances farmers' social capital. The results show that: (1) participation significantly increases farmers' bonding social capital by 6.8 percentage points (ATT 0.068, SE 0.002), suggesting that systematic education not only strengthens individual capabilities but also facilitates the expansion of social networks; (2) correspondence education yields a stronger social-capital-promoting effect than distance education, with estimated effects of 8.1 and 5.8 percentage points, respectively, highlighting the potential role of face-to-face interaction and repeated social engagement in enhancing farmers' bonding social capital; and (3) older farmers experience slightly larger gains in bonding social capital than younger farmers (10.8 versus 10.5 percentage points), and female farmers experience substantially larger gains than male farmers (12.8 versus 5.1 percentage points), indicating stronger marginal returns among groups with relatively weaker social networks. Overall, the findings reveal that rural talent policies generate important spillover value by fostering social capital accumulation. This implies that future policy design should jointly consider the dual effects on human capital and social capital and, in light of group heterogeneity, improve the matching mechanisms between training modalities and target participants to enhance policy precision and overall effectiveness.
PUBMED_42788636	PubMed	2026	Duagnosis: Locating Clinical Uncertainty in the Diagnostic Framework. RATIONALE, AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: Clinical reasoning research has predominantly operated within a single epistemological system. The prevailing response to clinical uncertainty in primary care has been to cultivate tolerance, embrace ambiguity, or learn to navigate it: each treats uncertainty as inherent to the encounter. We propose a complementary move. Much of what is called clinical uncertainty may be attributed less to the patient's condition than to the reach of the diagnostic framework through which the clinician reasons. We introduce the concept of duagnosis (dual + gnosis, 'knowing'): the clinical cognition in which two independent diagnostic systems are simultaneously activated within a single clinician's reasoning. METHODS: Conceptual analysis proceeding through concept definition, differentiation from neighbouring frameworks, development of the epistemological argument, and institutional comparison across East Asia. The analysis draws on clinical reasoning research, the philosophy of medicine, evidence on the care of persistent physical symptoms, and comparative scholarship on traditional medicine. RESULTS: The core contribution is epistemological: what one framework cannot formulate may resolve into a recognisable, actionable pattern in another, so that uncertainty is partly a property of the framework and not only of the patient. Duagnosis can be stated in two versions: a broad sense continuous with family medicine's plural readings of the patient, and a strict sense in which the criteria of evidence themselves change. An East Asian institutional comparison shows that Japan's unified medical licence locates diagnostic duality within individual clinician cognition for every physician, a capacity medical education has not cultivated. CONCLUSION: Expanding the diagnostic repertoire, not merely tolerating uncertainty, can reduce the proportion of presentations for which no clinical formulation exists. Locating uncertainty partly in the reach of the framework, rather than in the patient, is a reframing that applies beyond any one health system, with implications for communication and referral.
PUBMED_42737970	PubMed	2026	Dynamics of Antibiotic Resistance Gene Profiles in Captive Forest Musk Deer (Moschus berezovskii) Along a Breeding Duration Gradient. BACKGROUND: To conserve wild populations and ensure a sustainable supply of musk, China initiated the captive breeding of forest musk deer. The temporal dynamics of gut antibiotic resistance gene (ARG) profiles in captive forest musk deer along a breeding duration gradient remain poorly characterized. METHODS: In this study, we employed metagenomic sequencing to systematically characterize the profiles and potential mobility of ARGs. Samples were divided into short-term, medium-term and long-term groups according to breeding durations. RESULTS: A total of 331 ARG subtypes and 71 mobile genetic element (MGE) subtypes were annotated across all samples. ARG Shannon diversity differed overall across groups (Kruskal-Wallis, p 0.03); Bonferroni-adjusted Dunn's test showed no significant pairwise differences. PCoA (Bray-Curtis) demonstrated distinct separation of the ST group (p 0.002), and shared core ARG subtypes gradually increased with extended breeding years. A strong positive correlation between ARG and MGE abundances was identified (r 0.85, p 0.0001). In total, 63 contigs carrying co-localized ARG-MGE complexes were recovered. The ST group contained the highest proportion of such contigs. The ST group displayed tight physical ARG-MGE linkage within 1-3 kb genomic intervals. CONCLUSIONS: Our results reveal that breeding duration is associated with the gut ARG characteristics of captive forest musk deer. Short-term captivity has higher ARG-MGE co-localization, suggesting a higher possibility of mobilization.
PUBMED_42776645	PubMed	2026	Ebola Virus Disease in the Era of One Health and Global Preparedness: Evolving Epidemiology, Genomic Surveillance, and Future Challenges. Ebola virus disease (EVD) remains one of the most severe viral hemorrhagic fevers, with recurrent outbreaks challenging global healthcare systems. This narrative review traces the evolving epidemiology of EVD from the first recognized outbreaks in 1976 to the ongoing 2026 Bundibugyo virus public health emergency in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and Uganda. Over nearly five decades, the recognized range of Ebola outbreak contexts and amplification mechanisms has broadened considerably: rural zoonotic spillovers remain the predominant mode of emergence, but the scale and reach of subsequent transmission increasingly depend on where introductions occur, on delays in detection, on population mobility, on ecological disruption, on armed conflict, on healthcare-associated transmission, and on viral persistence in survivors. Major advances in molecular epidemiology and genomic surveillance have improved outbreak investigation, enabling real-time transmission reconstruction and detection of survivor-linked resurgence. Vaccination, particularly ring vaccination with rVSV-ZEBOV, has shown high effectiveness against Zaire ebolavirus, yet vaccine equity gaps and the absence of licensed vaccines for Sudan virus and Bundibugyo virus remain critical vulnerabilities, though new candidate vaccines and therapeutics for Bundibugyo virus entered clinical evaluation in mid-2026. Artificial intelligence and digital technologies, including AI-assisted early warning systems, portable sequencing, drones, blockchain, and mobile health platforms, offer promising tools for outbreak preparedness, but robust evidence of their real-world operational impact during filovirus outbreaks remains limited, and their deployment in low-resource settings faces substantial barriers related to infrastructure, literacy, data costs, and governance. Integrated preparedness frameworks that combine ecological surveillance, resilient healthcare systems, community engagement, and international coordination under a One Health umbrella are increasingly viewed as a strategic necessity. The 2026 Bundibugyo outbreak reaffirms that despite decades of lessons, structural weaknesses in surveillance, response timeliness, and community trust continue to recur. Sustainable, multi-year financing, diversified vaccine platforms, regional manufacturing, and local co-design of digital tools are essential to translate lessons into lasting change. Preparedness is best understood as a continuous process rather than a reactive state.
PUBMED_42779234	PubMed	2026	Echinococcosis control in China from the One Health perspective . Echinococcosis is a neglected zoonotic parasitic disease across the world, which imposes a substantial burden on human health and socioeconomic development in endemic areas. From a One Health perspective, this review systematically summarizes the legal framework, scheme, integrated interventions, control achievements, and challenges in the national echinococcosis control programme of China. An integrated strategy centered on control of the source of Echinococcus infections has been implemented for echinococcosis control in China, and cross-sectoral and cross-regional multidisciplinary coordination mechanisms have been progressively established, resulting in remarkable achievements gained in human health, animal health, and integrated environmental management. The endemicity of echinococcosis remarkably reduced in China in 2023 as compared to results from the national echinococcosis epidemiological survey in China between 2012 and 2016 (baseline), with an 82.14% reduction in human prevalence, an 80.00% reduction in detection of echinococcosis among children, a reduction of prevalent echinococcosis patients to 25 400 cases, a 36.96% reduction in the number of dogs, an 88.24% reduction in the prevalence of Echinococcus infections in dogs, a 67.00% reduction in the number of stray dogs, an 80.77% reduction in the prevalence of echinococcosis in live-stock, and a 69.23% reduction in the prevalence of Echinococcus infections in rodents. Nevertheless, an estimated 14 600 canines were found to have Echinococcus infections in endemic areas across China in 2023, and the prevalence of Echinococcus infections increased by 241.03% in wild canines in 2023 relative to in 2021, which underscores the persistent threat to echinococcosis transmission. Future efforts are required to strengthen the One Health governance system, increase the financial investment, foster innovations in integrated control technologies, enhance cross-sectoral collaboration, and improve the capacity building at the grassroots level to advance the achievement of the national target of basically controlling echinococcosis in all endemic counties in China by 2030, thereby facilitating the process towards echinococcosis control and elimination.
PUBMED_42721862	PubMed	2026	Eco-serological study of scrub typhus (Orientia tsutsugamushi) among indigenous populations in South India. Scrub typhus, a vector-borne zoonotic disease, remains a growing public health concern in India, particularly in the Western Ghats. We conducted a sero-prevalence and ectoparasite survey during 2023-2024 among indigenous populations of Kothagiri and Gudalur blocks, Nilgiris district, Tamil Nadu. A total of 240 serum samples from the general population with a mean age of 17 (Range: 5-45) years were screened using IgM and IgG ELISA. In Kothagiri, IgM and IgG positivity rates were 5% and 2.5%, respectively, whereas Gudalur reported 5.83% and 43.33%. Overall, 28% of sera tested positive, with higher rates in females (31.45%) than males (24.58%). Among indigenous communities, Paniyas (56.82%) and Kurumba (58.33%) groups in Gudalur recorded elevated sero-positivity, particularly in rural and forest-fringe areas. Screening of 79 undifferentiated febrile illness cases revealed a 32.9% positivity rate, with the Paniyas and Kattunayakkan groups most affected. Rodent surveillance yielded 42 hosts representing five species, harboring 3516 trombiculid mites. Six species were identified in Kothagiri and nine in Gudalur, including Leptotrombidium langati (new country record), and L. puta and Schoengastiella singularis (first reports from southern India). These findings confirm active transmission of scrub typhus in Nilgiris and demonstrate considerable ecological diversity of vectors. Targeted surveillance, community awareness, and vector control strategies are warranted to mitigate disease risk among vulnerable indigenous populations.
PUBMED_42766540	PubMed	2026	Ecological risk assessment of migratory bird feces in plateau wetland: Phosphorus speciation, ARGs, and pathogens. Plateau wetlands are critical habitats for migratory birds, but the potential ecological risks from the large-scale accumulation of migratory bird feces (MBF) remain poorly understood. This study focused on seven wintering waterbird species, including the Grus nigricollis, Grus grus, Fulica atra, Anas strepera, Anas zonorhyncha, Mareca penelope, and Tadorna ferruginea at Caohai Plateau Wetland, sampling across March 2024, January 2025 and March 2025. The phosphorus (P) speciation, antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs), pathogens, and their interactions were assessed using sequential phosphorus extraction, solution 31P-nuclear magnetic resonance (31P-NMR), and shotgun metagenomic sequencing. Results showed that MBF was enriched in nutrients and heavy metals, with Gruiformes feces containing high total P (0.65% dry weight). Orthophosphate accounted for 90.68% of total P and labile NaHCO3-Po constituted the dominant organic P fraction, collectively indicating strong guanotrophication potential. Metagenomic annotation recovered 231 potential pathogens with Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella enterica, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa as dominant taxa; 21 ARG classes were identified, dominated by multidrug resistance genes (32.14-39.29%). Heavy metal (Cu, Cd, Zn) selection pressure enriched MGEs in avian gut microbiota, thereby facilitating horizontal transfer of ARGs and virulence factors (VFs) and ultimately driving the enrichment of multi-drug resistant pathogens. The low-temperature plateau environment further extended the environmental persistence of these hazardous biological contaminants. This study provides a synergistic risk network linking nutrient loading, heavy metal pollution, antimicrobial resistance, and pathogenic proliferation in MBF-impacted plateau wetlands, providing scientific support for plateau wetland ecological restoration and targeted public health risk mitigation under the One Health framework.
PUBMED_42726887	PubMed	2026	Ecological specialization in vectors alters transmission thresholds and endemic dynamics in multi-host, multi-vector systems. Modeling vector-borne pathogens that circulate among several host and vector species hinges on how the force of infection (FOI) is defined. In an i-host, j-vector susceptible-infectious-recovered modeling framework I compare two common FOI denominators: (i) a weighted form in which vectors bite preferred hosts disproportionately, and (ii) an unweighted form that assumes opportunistic biting. Using identical parameter sets calibrated to primate-Aedes data from K dougou (Senegal), the weighted FOI doubles the basic reproduction number (R0) relative to the opportunistic FOI and can shift R0 across the epidemic threshold. It also produces higher long-run prevalence and larger oscillations. Both autonomous formulations undergo a forward transcritical bifurcation at R0 1. Selecting an ecologically realistic biting assumption is therefore critical for predicting sylvatic-to-urban spillover risk and designing interventions in multi-host systems.
PUBMED_42790309	PubMed	2026	Economic burden and cost-effectiveness of brucellosis control strategies in large commercial dairy herds in Bangladesh: A Bayesian decision-analytic study. Bovine brucellosis caused by Brucella abortus is endemic in Bangladesh, but its financial cost and the economics of control have not been quantified for the commercial dairy sector. We estimated the annual economic burden of infection in 17 large commercial dairy herds (194-2850 animals; 2696 animals tested), compared six control strategies over a 10-year economic horizon, and simulated a phased programme combining adult mass vaccination with subsequent test-and-cull. Herd-specific Bayesian posterior estimates of true prevalence and force of infection (FOI, the annual hazard of infection in a susceptible animal) were carried into a stochastic Monte Carlo model (50,000 iterations) built on a Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) design, in which infected breeding females were allocated to four mutually exclusive outcome states so that loss components could be summed without double counting. A compartmental model of susceptible, vaccinated and infectious animals, with an additional class for animals whose vaccine-induced immunity had waned, projected infection over 20 years. Mean annual loss across the cohort was 36.03 million Bangladeshi taka (BDT) (95% uncertainty interval 21.65-52.06; approximately USD 307,900 at the 2024 exchange rate of 117 BDT per USD). Reduced milk yield accounted for 45.5% of the total loss and an extended calving interval for 34.6%. In a global sensitivity analysis using partial rank correlation coefficients (PRCC), abortion probability (PRCC 0.890, 95% CI 0.888-0.892) and the subclinical milk deficit (0.855) dominated uncertainty in the burden. Vaccination was the efficient instrument: mean benefit-cost ratio (BCR) was 21.00 for heifer-only vaccination and 9.08 for mass vaccination, exceeding unity in all 17 herds, but neither strategy eliminated infection within 20 years in more than two herds. Elimination in all 17 herds required serological culling. The decisive constraint was not the phase schedule but the adult vaccination protocol. All 23 combinations of phase-1 duration and phase overlap eliminated infection in every herd, at a discounted cohort cost of 69.7-168.0 million BDT. Holding that schedule fixed and replacing the reduced-dose conjunctival adult protocol with full-dose subcutaneous S19 raised cost 4.6-fold to 545.3 million BDT and turned cohort net benefit from +57.85 to -368.28 million BDT, because 22,695 uninfected animals were culled as vaccinal seroreactors instead of 818. Shortening the interval between campaign and test round from 26 to 4 weeks had the same effect. Mass vaccination is the first-line intervention for large commercial Bangladeshi dairy herds, and elimination requires a phased programme with serological culling; whether such a programme is affordable is determined by the dose, route and campaign-to-test interval of adult vaccination rather than by the length or overlap of its phases. These results apply to the large commercial sub-sector only and exclude human health costs, so the reported benefit-cost ratios are lower bounds on societal return.
PUBMED_42750777	PubMed	2026	Editorial: Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in foodborne pathogens.
PUBMED_42694424	PubMed	2026	Editorial: Cross-species transmission of viral infections.
PUBMED_42694214	PubMed	2026	Editorial: Perspectives in veterinary and zoonotic infection: 2025.
PUBMED_42714708	PubMed	2026	Effective Abatement of Multidrug-resistant Pathogens Employing Natural Polyphenols and Polyphenol-based Formulations: A Systematic Review and Integrated Network Pharmacology Approach. The upsurge in multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacterial pathogens poses a dire global public health concern, limiting the effectiveness of conventional antibiotics. Natural polyphenols and their derivatives have attracted immense attention due to their versatile pharmacological potentials encompassing antimicrobial, anti-biofilm, and anti-quorum sensing activities. However, a comprehensive understanding of polyphenols combating MDR pathogens and the mechanistic interactions needs to be elucidated. This systematic review aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of natural polyphenols and polyphenol-based formulations against MDR bacterial pathogens, along with inherent molecular targets, using an integrated network pharmacology approach. A systematic literature search following PRISMA guidelines was conducted across PubMed, Google Scholar, and the Cochrane databases, including peer-reviewed publications from 2015 to 2025. Studies reporting polyphenolic compounds and derivatives against MDR bacteria were derived based on predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria. Seventeen studies (n 17), including one clinical trial, met the inclusion criteria solely on polyphenolic compounds against MDR bacteria. Evidence indicates that natural polyphenols and their derivatives exert antimicrobial effects through multiple mechanisms, including efflux pump inhibition, quorum-sensing interference, biofilm disruption, and membrane damage. Further, nanoformulated polyphenols and metal-polyphenol complexes demonstrated enhanced stability, bioavailability, and synergistic activity with antibiotics for combating MDR pathogens. Network pharmacology analysis revealed significant interactions between polyphenols and virulence-related genes in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, and Staphylococcus aureus, highlighting their potential as multi-target anti-virulence agents. Thus, multi-target mechanisms, combined with antibiotic adjuvant potentials and nanodelivery approaches, envisage future translational research, clinical validation, and sustainable AMR therapies that align with global One Health initiatives and SDG 3.
PUBMED_42703068	PubMed	2026	Electron and Hydrogen Dual Spillover at CeO2/Fe3C Interfaces for Efficient NH3 Electrosynthesis and High-Performance Zn-NO3 - Batteries. The electrocatalytic nitrate reduction reaction (NO3RR) offers a sustainable route for ambient ammonia synthesis but is hindered by insufficient active hydrogen ( H) supply and strong adsorption of oxygen-containing intermediates. Herein, we propose an electron- and hydrogen-dual-channel interfacial engineering strategy by constructing a heterojunction of grain-boundary-rich CeO2 intimately interfaced with Fe3C on nickel foam (CeO2/Fe3C NF). Oxygen-vacancy-rich CeO2 with reversible Ce3+/Ce4+ redox pairs serves a dual function: it donates electrons to Fe3C, downshifting the d-band center of Fe sites to weaken intermediate adsorption and mitigate surface poisoning; and it facilitates water dissociation to generate H, which spills over onto Fe3C to ensure adequate H supply for hydrogenation. Benefiting from this dual spillover mechanism, CeO2/Fe3C NF achieves an exceptional NH3 electrosynthesis rate of 1.343 mmol h-1 cm-2 with a Faradaic efficiency of 97.04% at -0.3 V vs. RHE in an H-type cell, ranking among the best non-precious NO3RR electrocatalysts. Furthermore, a rechargeable Zn-NO3 - battery using CeO2/Fe3C NF as the cathode delivers a power density of 8.93 mW cm-2 and stable operation over 100 h. This work establishes an electron- and hydrogen-dual-channel paradigm for rational design of efficient NO3RR electrocatalysts.
PUBMED_42678314	PubMed	2026	Elucidating Photo-Kinetic Control in Photothermal Reverse Water-Gas Shift Reaction. Unlike the well-known charge-carrier kinetics in traditional photocatalysis, a knowledge gap remains regarding the photo-kinetic effects in heterogeneous photothermal catalysis. Conventionally, light is mainly regarded as a source of charge carriers and localized heating, yet how these light-induced effects alter intrinsic reaction kinetics, particularly the rate-determining step (RDS), remains unclear. Here, we provide direct kinetic evidence that illumination tunes the RDS in an archetypal Mars-van Krevelen (MvK) reverse water-gas shift (RWGS) reaction over In-doped MoO2. Under illumination, photogenerated electrons enrich In sites, promoting H2 activation and spillover while accelerating H2O desorption, thereby shifting the RDS from the H2-reduction half-reaction to the CO2-oxidation half-reaction. This kinetic modulation significantly enhances catalytic performance and lowers the apparent activation energy. Overall, this work elucidates the kinetic role of light in photothermal CO2 conversion, offering new insights into optimizing solar-driven catalytic processes.
PUBMED_42698884	PubMed	2026	Elucidating the perception, awareness and biosecurity practices among the live poultry and poultry-meat sellers to mitigate the risk of zoonotic salmonellosis. Zoonotic salmonellosis remains a major public health concern, especially in low-resource settings. Biosecurity measure of live poultry and poultry-meat vending shop is necessary to address zoonoses. This study investigated the knowledge, attitudes, and biosecurity practices of poultry and poultry-meat sellers toward the risk of zoonotic salmonellosis in Bangladesh. A cross-sectional study was conducted among 432 poultry and poultry-meat sellers using a structured questionnaire. A multistage sampling approach was utilized to select participants. Majority of the participants were male (75.5%), age between 26-34 years (31.9%), had primary education (28.9%), experience of 5 years in poultry and poultry-meat selling (40.3%), and monthly income was 20000 Bangladesh Taka (BDT) ( US 163.40) (43.3%). Additionally, minimal sellers had training on live poultry marketing (33.1%), and poultry-meat processing along with marketing (28.5%). Poultry and poultry-meat sellers of 33.34% and 62.03% had the good knowledge and positive attitudes respectively. While 41.43% were involved in appropriate biosecurity practice. Moreover, the mean knowledge, attitude, and practice scores were 53.12 0.89%, 68.59 0.79%, and 54.58 0.73%, respectively. Multivariate analyses, higher education was a strong predictor of good knowledge (Bachelor's degree: OR 6.64, 95%CI:2.59-17.04, p 0.01), positive attitude (Bachelor's degree: OR 13.48, 95%CI:3.72-48.87, p 0.01), and appropriate biosecurity practices (HS: OR 5.52, 95%CI:2.62-11.63, p 0.01). Sellers with good knowledge, positive attitudes, and appropriate biosecurity practices perceived higher zoonotic risk (median 7, p 0.05), with perception co-relation that significantly (p 0.01) influenced by education (r 0.131) and training (r 0.084). However, notable gaps in safe practices highlighting the need for training that enhances risk perception through applied knowledge, promotes awareness by changing attitudes, and hands-on biosecurity skills.
PUBMED_42742179	PubMed	2026	Emergence of a Bundibugyo virus variant in the 2026 outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda. In May 2026, an outbreak of Ebola disease caused by Bundibugyo virus (BDBV, species Orthoebolavirus bundibugyoense) was declared in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), with cases originating from DRC and locally transmitted cases reported in Uganda. Bundibugyo virus disease (BVD) outbreaks were previously recorded in 2007-2008 in Bundibugyo District, Uganda, and in 2012 in Isiro, DRC. Here, we generated 22 genomes from samples obtained from individuals with BVD in DRC and Uganda. These genomes form a well-supported phylogenetic cluster separate from BDBV variants associated with the 2007 and 2012 outbreaks, together with evidence for sustained human transmission. This is consistent with the emergence of a new zoonotic spillover event rather than resurgence from previously reported variants. Besides ongoing efforts in strengthening surveillance systems, community engagement, establishing Ebola treatment centers, and developing targeted medical countermeasures; our report advocates to specifically increase decentralized laboratory diagnostics capacity, with pan-Orthoebolavirus assays, including genomic sequencing capacity, for limiting further outbreak expansion, timely detection and control of future outbreaks.
PUBMED_42691773	PubMed	2026	Emergency department utilization following the introduction of a new primary health care center in Wiener Neustadt, Austria: an interrupted time series analysis. BACKGROUND: Emergency department (ED) overcrowding is an important public health issue, one cause of which is utilization of care by nonurgent cases that could instead be treated in an outpatient setting. One health policy measure that has been implemented in many healthcare systems is the expansion of primary care to alleviate dependence on EDs. OBJECTIVE: In Austria, primary health care centers (PHCCs) are being expanded to mitigate the increasing ED visits. The opening of a PHCC in Wiener Neustadt served as a quasi-experiment that allowed us to examine changes in ED admissions following the opening. METHODS: An interrupted time series analysis (ITSA) was used to estimate trends before and after the PHCC opened. Administrative data from the hospital emergency department were analyzed. Stratification by age, gender, and Manchester Triage priority was applied to examine differential effects. Influenza adjustment was included to account for seasonal effects. RESULTS: The ITSA revealed an increasing trend prior to the PHCC opening ( 1 0.01). At the interruption point, a significant level change ( 2 8.01) was observed that could not be explained by seasonal effects. Overall, after the PHCC opening a reversed trend in ED admissions ( 3 -0.03) was found. Urgent cases were unaffected, whereas nonurgent cases exhibited a significant declining trend. CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that expanding PHCC services is associated with changes in ED utilization trends. Possible associations between PHCC opening and ED visits are found and do not occur immediately.
PUBMED_42690064	PubMed	2026	Emerging tick-borne viral diseases in East Asia: pathology-driven insights into pathogenesis and disease causality. SUMMARYTick-borne viral infections have emerged as a significant and growing public health concern. In East Asia, severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) has served as a prototypical disease in which pathological analyses have substantially advanced the understanding of disease pathogenesis. SFTS is characterized by profound immune dysregulation driven by viral tropism for plasmablast-lineage B cells, leading to cytokine storm and hemophagocytic syndrome. Complementary analyses of human clinical specimens and experimental animal models, including cats and ferrets, have provided critical insights into the immunopathogenesis of SFTS. The recent identification of additional tick-borne viruses, including Oz virus (OZV), Yezo virus (YEZV), and Alongshan virus (ALSV), has further expanded the spectrum of emerging infections in this region. Notably, pathological investigation of a fatal human case of OZV infection demonstrated direct viral localization within cardiomyocytes, establishing a causal link between infection and fulminant myocarditis and highlighting a distinct organ-specific pathogenic mechanism. Despite the advances in genomic technologies that enable rapid detection of novel viruses, establishing causal relationships between viral presence and disease remains a major challenge. Tissue-based pathological approaches, particularly in situ localization of viral components, are, therefore, essential for defining disease mechanisms and confirming etiological roles. This review provides a comprehensive synthesis of tick-borne viral infections in East Asia, with particular emphasis on Japan, integrating pathological, virological, and clinical perspectives. It also identifies key knowledge gaps and underscores the importance of a synergistic One Health framework that incorporates both human and veterinary pathology to advance the understanding and control of these emerging diseases.
PUBMED_42719778	PubMed	2026	Empowering women for health security in India: a One Health cascade training model for strengthening biosecurity through women veterinarians and farmers. INTRODUCTION: Zoonotic diseases remain a significant public health threat in India, where human-animal interactions are frequent due to its dense population and distinct agricultural economy that lends itself to an increased risk of zoonotic spillover of high-consequence pathogens. Despite policy initiatives promoting One Health approaches, barriers like limited awareness and inadequate biosecurity practices persist. Women farmers play crucial yet under-recognized roles in livestock management but have limited access to training on best biosecurity practices due to limited engagement with male veterinary health professionals, who primarily conduct field visits in India. Women veterinary health professionals (WVHPs) can operationally engage better with WFs but similarly face barriers to entry for fieldwork positions and have limited access to training for professional growth. METHODS: To address this gap, we designed and implemented an innovative cascade-training model with the goal of strengthening detection and prevention of high-consequence pathogens by linking WVHPs and WFs. We employed a cascade-training model beginning with training of WVHPs on biosafety, biosecurity, One Health, and community engagement and equipping them with the tools and skills to train WFs. These trained WVHPs implemented local training sessions for WFs using interactive tools like case studies and games. Acquired knowledge metrics were assessed through pre- and post-training assessments and focus group discussions (FGDs). RESULTS: We trained 38 WVHPs, and knowledge scores improved from 10.6 2.49 to 11.3 2.47 when given the same questions in pre- and post-assessments. The FGDs demonstrated WVHPs' understanding of WF knowledge and issues faced. Three overarching themes emerged regarding WF capacity building: knowledge gaps and high-risk practices, structural and sociocultural barriers, and pathways for effective community engagement/knowledge transfer. Of the 152 WFs trained, 79.9% could identify clinical signs of animal sickness, and 85.9% recognized integrated prevention practices. However, gaps in zoonotic disease awareness and sanitation practices were evident. CONCLUSION: The cascade-training model demonstrated that engaging women professionals as both practitioners and trainers can advance community-level biosecurity practices and disease detection. Embedding such women-centred approaches within national One Health strategies can strengthen India's biosecurity systems and contribute to global health security goals.
PUBMED_42675153	PubMed	2026	Endophytic bacteria associated with turmeric, ginger and white radish exhibit dual roles as producers of antibacterial metabolites and carriers of multidrug resistance. The increasing global burden of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) necessitates the exploration of unconventional microbial niches for novel bioactive compounds. Simultaneously, it is also necessary to evaluate their role in the dissemination of resistant bacteria through the food chain. Endophytic bacteria inhabiting edible plant tissues represent a largely underexplored interface between environmental microbiota and human exposure. In this exploratory study, endophytic bacteria were isolated from fresh rhizomes of Zingiber officinale (ginger), Curcuma longa (turmeric), and Raphanus sativus (white radish), and characterized for their antimicrobial activity and antibiotic resistance profiles. A total of 24 endophytic bacterial isolates were isolated from fresh rhizomes of turmeric, ginger and white radish using tissue segmentation method. Among them, eight isolates (33.33%) exhibited weak to strong inhibitory activity against multidrug-resistant clinical pathogens, including Escherichia coli, Escherichia fergusonii, Shigella spp., Staphylococcus aureus, and Bacillus cereus. Molecular identification based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing revealed that the isolate RD-1(b) was affiliated with Burkholderia contaminans and TM-4(b) and RD-2(c) with Enterobacter cloacae. Crude extracellular metabolites extracted from the RD-1(b) retained broad-spectrum antibacterial activity. Notably, these isolates demonstrated resistance to multiple antibiotics, including -lactams, macrolides, and tetracyclines, while remaining susceptible to selected agents such as ciprofloxacin and cotrimoxazole. The coexistence of antimicrobial activity and multidrug resistance within endophytic bacteria highlights their dual role as both potential sources of bioactive metabolites and reservoirs of AMR determinants. Given that these rhizomes are commonly consumed raw or minimally processed, the presence of such bacteria potentially raises food safety concerns. The possible beneficial role of these endophytes should also be explored.
PUBMED_42761835	PubMed	2026	Environmental and epidemiological drivers of dengue forecasting across heterogeneous transmission settings in Brazil and Panama. BACKGROUND: Dengue fever is the fastest-growing mosquito-borne viral disease globally, with unprecedented epidemics reported across the Americas in 2024. Brazil and Panama experienced record transmission that strained public health systems and highlighted limitations in existing surveillance and early warning approaches. Despite growing evidence that climatic variability, land-use change, and other environmental factors influence dengue transmission, scalable approaches integrating heterogeneous environmental datasets remain limited. METHODS: We integrated climatic, environmental, demographic, and epidemiological datasets to develop and evaluate a dengue forecasting system across Brazil and Panama. Monthly surveillance data (2015-2024) were harmonized with multi-source environmental predictors using a reproducible workflow before evaluating statistical, machine learning, and neural network models. Performance was assessed using standard forecasting metrics and agreement between predicted and observed transmission patterns during the 2024 epidemic. FINDINGS: Dengue transmission exhibited substantial spatial heterogeneity across both countries. Environmental predictors, including temperature, precipitation variability, land-cover characteristics, mosquito suitability, and demographic indicators, dominated model performance in Brazil, whereas recent transmission history contributed more strongly in Panama. Ensemble forecasts reduced MAE by 24 4% in Brazil and 29 0% in Panama relative to a seasonal-na ve benchmark and demonstrated substantial agreement with observed spatial risk classifications. INTERPRETATION: Integrating heterogeneous environmental datasets with epidemiological surveillance improved understanding and prediction of dengue transmission across contrasting ecological settings. Differences in the relative importance of environmental and epidemiological predictors between Brazil and Panama suggest that forecasting approaches should be adapted to local environmental conditions rather than transferred directly across regions, supporting climate-informed surveillance and public health planning.
PUBMED_42787051	PubMed	2026	Environmental circulation of multiple avian influenza subtypes and potential association with human infections in central China. INTRODUCTION: Avian influenza viruses (AIVs) continue to circulate in live poultry markets (LPMs), posing potential risks for zoonotic exposure. This study investigated the environmental circulation of AIVs and their potential epidemiological associations with human infection in Henan Province, China. METHODS: We analyzed 7,956 environmental samples collected from poultry-associated settings in Henan Province between 2020 and 2025. Multivariable logistic regression was used to identify factors associated with AIV detection. Serological surveillance was conducted among occupationally exposed individuals, and phylogenetic analyses were performed to characterize the genetic relationships between human-derived and environmental AIVs. RESULTS: A total of 1,460 samples (18.35%) tested positive for AIVs. LPMs were significantly associated with higher odds of AIV detection (OR 7.211, 95% CI: 5.039-10.319, P 0.001), and the odds of AIV detection increased over the surveillance period (OR 1.254, 95% CI: 1.210-1.301, P 0.001). Multiple AIV subtypes were detected, with H9N2 remaining predominant throughout the study period. Five human infections were identified, including H5N6 and H3N8 infections in 2022 and three H9N2 infections in 2025. Serological surveillance identified H9N2-seropositive and H3N8-reactive samples among occupationally exposed individuals. Phylogenetic analyses revealed genetic similarities between human-derived and environmental viruses. Three H3N8 viruses, including one isolated from a human case, formed a distinct phylogenetic cluster, with their internal genes closely related to co-circulating H9N2 viruses. DISCUSSION: These findings demonstrate sustained circulation of multiple AIV subtypes in poultry-associated environments and highlight the importance of integrated environmental and human surveillance for the early detection of viruses with zoonotic potential.
PUBMED_42673710	PubMed	2026	Environmental justice and One Health: Toward an integrated framework for equitable and sustainable health outcomes. The One Health framework, which recognizes the interdependence of human, animal, and ecosystem health, has gained considerable momentum in global health policy. However, its full potential to address health inequities remains underexplored. Environmental justice (EJ), defined by the US EPA as the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race, color, culture, national origin, income, and educational levels with respect to the development, implementation, and enforcement of protective environmental laws, regulations, and policies, constitutes a natural and necessary complement to One Health. This narrative review examines the conceptual, empirical, and policy interfaces between EJ and One Health, arguing that each framework is incomplete without the other. This review analyzes how socially marginalized populations bear disproportionate environmental burdens through differential exposures to pollutants, zoonotic risks, antimicrobial-resistant pathogens, and the adverse health consequences of climate change. The manuscript also discusses how the One Health approach can be enriched by incorporating EJ principles, including procedural justice, community participation, and the recognition of structural determinants of health. Five guiding principles for integration (namely, structural equity, community-centered participation, epistemic diversity, intersectional vulnerability analysis, and global justice) are proposed, together with concrete recommendations for researchers, policymakers, and international health organizations aiming to build a more equitable One Health governance architecture.
PUBMED_42749011	PubMed	2026	Environmental risk factors and spatial patterns of Fasciola hepatica infection in herbivores from Salta and Jujuy provinces, Argentina. Fasciolosis, caused by Fasciola hepatica, is a snail-borne zoonotic disease of major veterinary importance, responsible for significant economic losses in livestock. Its transmission is strongly influenced by environmental and climatic conditions. In northwestern Argentina, particularly in Salta and Jujuy provinces, the disease is endemic; however, the environmental and spatial determinants of its distribution remain incompletely understood. This study aimed to identify environmental risk factors and spatial patterns associated with F. hepatica infection in herbivores to better understand its epidemiological dynamics and support targeted control strategies. A retrospective analysis was conducted using coproparasitological records from 1994 to 2025 from livestock in both provinces. A total of 12,465 fecal samples from multiple host species were analyzed. The infection status was related to climatic variables, topography, and edaphic characteristics. Temporal variability and clear seasonal patterns were observed, with higher positive frequency in late winter-early spring. In the multivariate analysis, higher soil pH, sand and silt content, and cation exchange capacity were positively associated with infection, while bulk density and soil organic carbon were negatively associated. Spatial analysis identified nine significant clusters, including a main high-risk cluster in the central-western region of Salta and the central-southern region of Jujuy provinces, as well as several smaller focal clusters with increased relative risk. These findings demonstrate that fasciolosis distribution is non-random and driven by the interaction between soil properties, climate, host species, and spatial heterogeneity. The results provide a basis for risk-based surveillance and targeted control strategies adapted to local environmental conditions.
PUBMED_42746171	PubMed	2026	Epidemiological Investigation and Source Tracing of an Inhalation Anthrax Case with Traceability to Yunnan Province - Guangdong Province, China, March 2026. WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ABOUT THIS TOPIC?: Anthrax is a zoonotic disease caused by the bacterium Bacillus anthracis (B. anthracis). Inhalation anthrax, caused by inhalation of B. anthracis spores, is the rarest and most fatal form of anthrax. Historically, naturally acquired inhalation anthrax cases have mainly been associated with occupational exposure to infected animals or animal products, such as in wool mills or tanneries. WHAT IS ADDED BY THIS REPORT?: This report documents the first case of inhalation anthrax in China that was linked to environmental exposure in a historically endemic area, without direct contact with sick animals or animal products. The case was reported in Guangdong Province, however, the source was traced to the patient's newly built residence in Zhenxiong County, Yunnan Province, where environmental samples tested positive for B. anthracis nucleic acid. Three anthrax outbreaks have occurred in this region since 1990. WHAT ARE THE IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC HEALTH PRACTICE?: In anthrax-endemic areas, environmental exposure to contaminated soil or dust can pose a significant risk of anthrax infection, even without direct animal contact. Although rare, inhalation anthrax can occur naturally as B. anthracis spores can survive extreme environmental conditions in the soil or hay for long periods. As it is difficult to distinguish acute pulmonary infection from inhalational anthrax, severe cases were frequently initially suggested by metagenomic sequencing of the alveolar fluid, with similar findings reported for meningeal anthrax in the cerebrospinal fluid.
PUBMED_42717763	PubMed	2026	Epidemiological Surveillance of the Zoonotic Rat Lungworm (Angiostrongylus cantonensis) in Rats in Mainland Spain. Norway rats (Rattus norvegicus) and black rats (Rattus rattus) are the definitive hosts and primary reservoirs of Angiostrongylus cantonensis, an emerging zoonotic parasite globally considered the leading cause of human eosinophilic meningoencephalitis. A. cantonensis surveillance in rodent populations in Europe has been conducted in restricted geographic areas, but large-scale epidemiological studies remain lacking. We aimed to determine the prevalence of A. cantonensis in rat populations across mainland Spain and assess the spatial distribution of the parasite. A prospective cross-sectional study was conducted between 2022 and 2025, comprising a total of 407 individuals (244 Norway rats and 163 black rats). During necropsy, cardiopulmonary tissues were systematically collected and examined under a stereomicroscope for the presence of adult A. cantonensis. In addition, a nested molecular technique was performed to confirm the taxonomic identity of adult nematodes visualized during stereomicroscopic examination. Cardiopulmonary dissection revealed that only two individuals out of 407 (0.5%; 95% CI: 0.1-1.8), both black rats (Rattus rattus) from Valencia (eastern mainland Spain), harboured adult nematodes morphologically compatible with A. cantonensis in the heart. These parasites were successfully sequenced and molecularly confirmed as A. cantonensis, exhibiting 100% nucleotide identity with A. cantonensis sequences previously reported from gastropods in Spain and the USA. These findings evidence a localized distribution of A. cantonensis in rats across mainland Spain. Nevertheless, conducting continuous One Health surveillance of A. cantonensis in Europe is essential to fully understand the epidemiology of this parasite and to assess the associated potential public health risks across the continent.
PUBMED_42710821	PubMed	2026	Epidemiological and phylogenetic analysis of anthrax in Kazakhstan in 2024. BACKGROUND: Anthrax remains an important zoonotic disease in Kazakhstan due to the persistence of environmental reservoirs and long-standing endemic foci. Despite ongoing surveillance, the epidemiological characteristics and genetic diversity of circulating Bacillus anthracis strains in the country remain incompletely understood. METHODS: A retrospective epidemiological and phylogenetic investigation of anthrax outbreaks reported in Kazakhstan during 2024 was conducted. Epidemiological data were collected for all laboratory-confirmed human cases and associated outbreak foci. Confirmation of infection was performed by PCR, and B. anthracis isolates were obtained from clinical, environmental and animal-associated samples. Whole-genome sequencing and core-genome single nucleotide polymorphism (cgSNP) analysis were used to characterize the genetic relationships among isolates and to determine their phylogenetic placement. RESULTS: Nine anthrax outbreaks were identified across four regions of Kazakhstan (Almaty, Zhambyl, Atyrau, and West Kazakhstan), resulting in 20 confirmed human cases. All patients were male, with the highest proportion occurring among individuals aged 36-55 years (45%). The mean patient age was 43.9 years (range: 16-64 years). Most infections were associated with slaughtering infected livestock (65%), followed by handling contaminated meat (15%). PCR confirmed infection in all 20 human cases. Culture yielded 17 human-derived B. anthracis isolates from 14 patients and 17 environmental/animal-derived isolates, resulting in 34 isolates in total. Of these, 22 representative isolates underwent whole-genome sequencing. Phylogenetic analysis revealed the circulation of two major lineages. Isolates from Atyrau and West Kazakhstan clustered within the Trans-Eurasian (TEA/STI) lineage. Atyrau isolates formed a tight cluster differing by only 21-32 cgSNPs, consistent with a shared epidemiolocal source, whereas the West Kazakhstan isolate was highly divergent. Zhambyl and Almaty region belonged to the A.Br.Ames lineage but diverged into two distinct sublineages. Zhambyl region isolates demonstrated minimal divergence from the global reference genome Ames Ancestor, differing by only 16-31 SNPs. Almaty region isolates formed an endemic subclone, separated from the reference group by approximately 114 SNPs. Comparison with the Ames Ancestor and Sterne reference strains demonstrated substantial genetic divergence. CONCLUSION: Anthrax outbreaks in Kazakhstan during 2024 were primarily associated with livestock exposure and occurred within established endemic regions. Whole-genome sequencing revealed the coexistence of distinct TEA and Ames lineages, including evidence of persistent local transmission and long-term evolutionary stability of endemic B. anthracis populations. These findings enhance understanding of anthrax epidemiology in Central Asia and support the integration of genomic surveillance into national outbreak investigation programs.
PUBMED_42788600	PubMed	2026	Epidemiological surveillance of canine visceral leishmaniasis in a municipality in the Western Amazon. Visceral leishmaniasis is a zoonotic disease of public health importance in Brazil, with expansion into peri-urban areas. This cross-sectional study evaluated 450 dogs in a municipality of the Western Amazon, Brazil, using TR-DPP serology, ELISA confirmation, hematological analysis, PCR targeting the Hsp70 gene, and entomological surveys with CDC light traps. A total of 45 dogs (10%) were seroreactive, and 34 were confirmed by ELISA. Hemoparasites such as Babesia spp. were detected. All pooled samples were negative by PCR. Six species of phlebotomine sand flies were identified, including Nyssomyia antunesi and Migonemyia migonei. The findings suggest early exposure of dogs in an area of emerging epidemiological risk, highlighting the importance of integrated surveillance strategies.
PUBMED_42780750	PubMed	2026	Epidemiology, risk factors, and prevention of animal bites injuries in Slovakia: an 18-year epidemiological analysis. BACKGROUND: Animal bite injuries, predominantly from dogs, rank among the top 15 causes of nonfatal injuries globally. Since 2006, negligible number of cases of rabies were declared in Slovakia, lacks comprehensive national data on bite demographics and outcomes. METHODS: This Epidemiological study analysed 14,978 patient records (2006-2023) obtained from Slovak public health databases. Statistical analyses, including chi-square tests and linear regression, were used to evaluate trends in bite incidence, vaccination coverage, and associated risk factors. RESULTS: Between 2006 and 2023, 14,978 individuals sought treatment for animal exposures, with 88% of exposures attributed to domestic animals, primarily dogs (78.9%). Children aged 5-9 years and adults aged 25-34 years represented the highest-risk groups. The authors observed a significant downward trend in bite incidence over time ( -0.507, p 0.002), with hands being the most commonly affected sites (41%). No human rabies cases were reported after 1990, and nationwide animal vaccination programs led to the near elimination of rabies by 2006. However, the authors recorded a 50% increase in bite incidents in the post-lockdown period (2022-2023), predominantly affecting males. The analysis demonstrated a significant negative temporal trend, with animal bite incidence decreasing by approximately 0.51 cases per 100,000 population per year ( -0.507, 95% CI: -0.82 to -0.19, p 0.002). CONCLUSION: Slovakia's rabies control program represents a major public health success; however, animal exposures-particularly dog bites-remain a persistent problem. A temporary decline in bite incidence was observed during COVID-19 lockdowns, followed by a marked post-pandemic increase. Targeted prevention strategies should focus on high-risk populations, promote responsible pet ownership, and address emerging post-pandemic trends.
PUBMED_42774291	PubMed	2026	Equine alveolar echinococcosis: a focus on epidemiology, clinical and pathological features, and diagnostics. Here, we review equine alveolar echinococcosis (AE), focusing on its epidemiology, clinical and pathological features, and diagnostic challenges, through comparisons with AE in other host species. AE is a zoonotic disease caused by the larval form of the Echinococcus multilocularis tapeworm. Horses are considered dead-end hosts, in which AE infection can be detected at slaughter, highlighting their potential as sentinel animals in endemic areas. Equine AE is typically asymptomatic and is generally only found incidentally during meat inspection or necropsy. Standard diagnosis involves histopathology and conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing. Epidemiological surveys in Japan, Poland, and Canada have reported larval E. multilocularis detection rates ranging from 1.5-18.8%, where infections manifest as macroscopic grayish-white solid liver nodules in slaughtered horses. Molecular phylogenetic analysis targeting the mitochondrial cytochrome b(cob) gene has revealed that parasites isolated from horses in Japan and Canada belong to distinct haplogroups, indicating utility for elucidating the geographical genetic characteristics of larval E. multilocularis infection in horses. Isothermal amplification techniques such as loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) and recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) have demonstrated equivalent or superior sensitivity and specificity for detecting equine AE and may represent novel rapid genetic diagnostic tools as alternatives to PCR testing for rapid gene-based detection. These techniques will contribute to early detection of AE, especially in locations where specialized laboratory equipment is limited (e.g., abattoirs). Continued research on equine AE will thus greatly contribute to elucidating the environmental distribution of E. multilocularis and supporting the control of zoonotic disease.
PUBMED_42727818	PubMed	2026	Establishment and application of a triplex real-time fluorescent quantitative RT-PCR assay for simultaneous detection of H5, H7 subtype AIV and virulent NDV. To rapidly monitor clinical infections induced by highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) of H5/H7 subtypes and virulent Newcastle disease virus (NDV), mitigate economic losses in intensive poultry industry and reduce zoonotic spillover risks to human population, a one-tube triplex TaqMan real-time RT-qPCR was developed in this study. Three pairs of subtype-specific primers and corresponding fluorophore-labeled TaqMan probes were rationally designed targeting conserved hemagglutinin (HA) coding regions of H5-AIV, H7-AIV and fusion (F) gene of virulent NDV, respectively, referring to published multiplex RT-qPCR design strategies for avian respiratory viruses. After gradient optimization of primer/probe dosage, reverse transcription condition and thermal cycling parameters via matrix titration assay, standard curves were generated using absolute copy-number quantified viral RNA standards via droplet digital PCR (ddPCR), followed by systematic evaluation of analytical specificity, limit of detection (LOD), intra/inter-assay reproducibility and field diagnostic performance against official Chinese national standard monoplex RT-qPCR protocols. Specificity testing revealed exclusive positive amplification only for target H5-AIV, H7-AIV and virulent NDV, without any cross-reactive fluorescent signals from 10 heterogeneous non-target AIV subtypes (H1-H4, H6, H9-H13), attenuated NDV, infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV), infectious laryngotracheitis virus (ILTV) and infectious bronchitis virus (IBV). The absolute LOD was determined as 4.32 copies/ L (H5-AIV), 20.40 copies/ L (H7-AIV) and 5.14 copies/ L (virulent NDV). Linear regression analysis of standard curves yielded coefficients of determination (R2) of 0.9997, 0.9988 and 0.9997 and corresponding amplification efficiencies (E) of 94.58%, 103.60% and 97.20%. All intra- and inter-assay coefficients of variation (CV) across four concentration gradients were less than 1%, demonstrating robust assay repeatability. The assay accurately quantified co-infections across ratios of 1:9-9:1. The CT value is directly proportional to the target abundance. Even when the content is only 10% in co-infection, it can still be detected, indicating its excellent ability for co-infection detection. For total 384 field poultry oropharyngeal/cloacal swabs, the triplex assay is highly consistent with the national standard methods, with Kappa values exceeding 0.85 for all targets. In summary, this validated triplex TaqMan RT-qPCR features superior specificity, ultrahigh analytical sensitivity and outstanding stability, which is applicable for routine clinical pathogen diagnosis, large-scale live poultry market surveillance and epidemiological tracing of mixed co-infections caused by H5/H7 HPAIV and virulent NDV.
PUBMED_42788740	PubMed	2026	Establishment of an ex vivo vascular tissue model to investigate bunyavirus-triggered vascular endothelial injury. UNLABELLED: Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome, an emerging infectious disease caused by the tick-borne bunyavirus severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV), is associated with a high clinical fatality rate of 12%-50%. Vascular endothelial injury triggered by SFTSV infection has been linked to severe disease progression and mortality. Currently, a suitable model to investigate the underlying mechanisms of SFTSV-induced vascular damage is lacking. Here, we show that the ex vivo human vascular tissue can be used as a model for studying bunyavirus-triggered endothelial injury. Both SFTSV and Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) can successfully infect ex vivo human vascular tissue, as evidenced by detection of viral nucleoprotein and viral amplification in the tissue. Histopathological analysis, TUNEL staining, and endothelial injury-associated transcriptional changes revealed irregular venous tissue structure, luminal endothelial disruption, and apoptosis following infection. This model enables evaluation of antiviral compound efficacy, demonstrating that niclosamide or 4'-fluorouridine significantly inhibits SFTSV and RVFV replication in ex vivo vascular tissues. These findings establish the ex vivo human vascular tissue as a valuable tool for investigating bunyavirus-induced vascular pathogenesis and for evaluating antiviral therapeutics. IMPORTANCE: Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus and other pathogenic bunyaviruses cause severe human diseases that are frequently associated with vascular dysfunction. However, the mechanisms underlying virus-induced vascular injury remain poorly defined due to the lack of physiologically relevant human tissue models. Here, we establish an ex vivo human vascular tissue model that supports productive bunyavirus infection and enables quantitative assessment of endothelial injury, tissue damage, and antiviral efficacy. Using this model, we demonstrate that bunyavirus infection triggers endothelial disruption and that antiviral compounds can suppress viral replication and alleviate infection-associated tissue injury. This model provides a valuable experimental system for studying virus-vascular interactions and can support antiviral development against emerging bunyaviruses.
PUBMED_42713604	PubMed	2026	Evaluation of LN34 real-time PCR assay for detection of rabies virus in human and animal specimens. OBJECTIVES: Rabies, a neglected zoonotic encephalitis caused by lyssaviruses, claims around 59,000 lives annually. PCR-based methods are pivotal for laboratory confirmation of rabies in humans and animals. The LN34 pan-lyssavirus real time PCR assay has demonstrated good diagnostic performance in detecting rabies viral RNA in extensive evaluations with animal brain tissues. However, its application has not been adequately evaluated on human samples. METHODS: This study assessed the utility of the LN34 assay on human brain tissues, and antemortem samples such as cerebrospinal fluid, saliva and nuchal skin. Furthermore, this assay was also evaluated using postmortem dog saliva samples, in addition to animal brain samples. RESULTS: Compared to the gold-standard fluorescent antibody test (FAT), the LN34 assay showed 100 % sensitivity and specificity for both human and animal brain samples. For human antemortem samples, there was perfect agreement between the LN34 assay and routine real-time RT-PCR for detection of rabies virus (RABV). Similarly, there was complete agreement between the two assays when testing dog saliva samples. The sensitivity and specificity of saliva LN34 assay in laboratory-confirmed rabid dogs was 50 and 100 % respectively. CONCLUSIONS: The LN34 assay is a suitable alternative for diagnosis and surveillance of rabies in humans and animals in an area endemic for rabies lyssavirus.
PUBMED_42729707	PubMed	2026	Evaluation of Multi-Stakeholder Perspectives on the Preparedness of Ghana's Animal Health Services for African Swine Fever Control: A Cross-Sectional Study. BACKGROUND AND AIMS: African Swine Fever (ASF) is a highly fatal viral disease of pigs that has persisted in Ghana since its first introduction in 1999, causing recurrent outbreaks with devastating socioeconomic consequences for livelihoods and food security. Despite control measures implemented by Ghana's veterinary services, outbreaks continue, reflecting critical gaps in national preparedness and institutional support. This study assessed the preparedness of Ghana's animal health services to manage and control ASF. METHODS: A mixed-method of cross-sectional design was employed, combining structured questionnaires and semi-structured interviews across three geographic belts of Ghana. Participants included veterinary officers, pig farmers, policy makers, and community animal health workers. Data were entered into Microsoft Excel and exported into Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) Version 27 for analysis. RESULTS: Findings revealed partial preparedness: strong centralized diagnostic capacity but weak regional infrastructure and limited farmer engagement. ASF awareness varied, with persistent misconceptions about zoonotic potential and cultural beliefs undermining prevention. Institutional support was inconsistent where over 70% of farmers reported no cooperative support and 80% received no government assistance during outbreaks. Biosecurity compliance was irregular, constrained by financial limits and absent incentives, leading to under-reporting. Farmers and field officers lacked epidemiological literacy, and highly centralized surveillance caused delays in field investigation and laboratory confirmation, with low responsiveness at regional and community levels. CONCLUSION: African Swine Fever's impacts extend beyond farm-level losses to livelihood collapse, psychosocial distress, and pork market disruption. Though not zoonotic, its control demands a One Health approach integrating veterinary, environmental, and socioeconomic dimensions through decentralized diagnostics, stronger farmer-vet partnerships, compensation systems, and psychosocial resilience strategies. WHAT'S KNOWN: African swine fever is a highly lethal viral disease of pigs with no vaccine or treatment, bringing huge economic and livelihood losses around the world.Since the first detection in 1999, ASF outbreaks have occurred periodically in Ghana, pointing to the deficiencies in disease surveillance, biosecurity, and institutional coordination.Rapid diagnostics, compensation schemes, and strong veterinary governance structures have been effective control mechanisms in other regions, for example, Europe. WHAT'S NEW: This study offers a multi-stakeholder assessment of Ghana's ASF preparedness, integrating perspectives from veterinary officers, policymakers, and farmers in a holistic approach not previously reported in ASF literature for Ghana.It also, therefore, identifies psychosocial impacts and livelihood collapse among farmers and proposes incorporating psychosocial recovery and One Health principles into national ASF preparedness frameworks.Results indicate partial preparedness: strong central diagnostics but weak regional infrastructure, as well as limited farmer awareness and institutional support. WHAT ARE THE CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THIS STUDY?: The strengthening of decentralized diagnostics and surveillance, including rapid field tests and regional laboratory capacity, is of great importance for early detection and containment.Improved reporting and compliance will occur by implementing farmer-veterinary partnerships, compensation mechanisms, and biosecurity incentives.Molecular monitoring, psychological support, and multisectoral coordination added to Ghana's ASF Strategy would build long-term resilience and align national control with international standards for a One Health approach.
PUBMED_42730678	PubMed	2026	Evaluation of a 0.05 T low-field MRI system for canine brain imaging via comparison with images acquired at 1.5 T field strength: a pilot cadaver study. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) systems continue to grow in number in veterinary and human medicine with higher field strength magnets increasingly available; however, the associated high costs have created healthcare inequities. This technical feasibility study aimed to evaluate a low-cost, portable, and permanent magnet-based 0.05 T low-field system (LF), originally designed for human neuroimaging, for assessing the canine brain. By using 23 canine cadavers, a scanning protocol was developed, consisting of transverse T1-weighted (T1w) and T2-weighted (T2w) sequences, and compared to a 1.5 T (HF) protocol for the visibility of 22 anatomical features. For the purpose of hydrocephalus evaluation, the LF system showed non-inferior detection of the lateral ventricles (LV) and mesencephalic aqueduct on T2w sequences with 90% conditional probability for detecting these features on the LF, given they were present on the HF. For T1w sequences, the LF system had inconclusive non-inferiority for detection of LV with 76.6% conditional probability. In summary, a canine brain scanning protocol was successfully developed for a 0.05 T MRI with preliminary evaluation suggestive that this device can aid with the detection of hydrocephalus. Future in vivo studies are required to evaluate the device's true clinical application.
PUBMED_42678818	PubMed	2026	Evolutionary games on higher-order networks. Traditional evolutionary game theory often represents population structure with dyadic networks, although many applications require payoffs defined over groups. Hypergraphs and simplicial complexes retain group membership explicitly, but their effects must be distinguished from nonlinearities already present in multiplayer payoff functions. This structured scoping review separates these two sources of variation. A multiplayer nonlinear-payoff effect arises from thresholds, synergy, saturation, or heterogeneous group benefits on a fixed interaction structure. Such effects can occur in well-mixed or spatial groups without higher-order topology. A higher-order topological effect arises from explicit group membership, hyperedge overlap, inter-order organization, or simplicial closure. Its assessment requires the payoff, update rule, group-size distribution, and selection regime to be fixed or closely matched. A documented search through July 30, 2026 identified 85 core works: 80 primary studies and 5 conceptual or review articles. Across this evidence, nonlinear payoffs generate frequency dependence, internal equilibria, invasion thresholds, and, in some models, multistability. Higher-order topology instead changes group sharing, spillover between groups, and the routes to invasion or fixation. Discontinuous transitions and hysteresis are model outcomes whose origins depend on the complete payoff, topology, update, and feedback specification. Related graph-based research on fairness, trust, AI safety races, open-data stewardship, and cheap talk defines a broader agenda. Social welfare must also be evaluated separately from cooperation frequency. Direct empirical tests and factorial comparisons with matched baselines remain limited.
PUBMED_42727863	PubMed	2026	Examining the Global Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Landscape in Food-Producing Animals. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in food producing animals is a One Health priority with documented public health and economic relevance, prompting countries to strengthen surveillance systems. This review focuses on antibacterial resistance in terrestrial food-producing animals; companion animal and aquatic animal species surveillance is beyond its scope. This review provides a high-level comparative analysis of existing AMR monitoring practices, identification of strengths and limitations, and future directions across major World Organisation of Animal Health (WOAH) countries. Findings indicate varying levels of system maturity, with established programs in the USA, Canada, and the European Union (EU), while emerging systems frequently lack essential funding, national coordination and crucial data transparency. Persistent structural and operational gaps include delayed reporting, limited data transparency, and inconsistent and non-standardized testing methodologies. The review outlines strategic recommendations for governments to establish comprehensive national surveillance systems, mandate data transparency, and invest in long-term infrastructure and workforce capacity. Strengthening veterinary AMR monitoring is critical not only for safeguarding public and animal health but also for driving scientifically based policy decisions and thereby advancing the Global One Health objectives.
PUBMED_42783337	PubMed	2026	Exploring and Mitigating Insecticide Resistance in Urban Pests with New Synergists and Insecticides. This review summarizes the impact of insecticide resistance in urban pests and its implications for 'One Health' systems. Mosquitoes are the major vector of human disease via blood feeding, followed by houseflies and cockroaches via physical contact, and finally bed bugs, ants, and termites, which are not typically disease vectors. Besides overt disease, other impacts in the context of One Health include nuisance biting and resultant infections, as well as allergic reactions. Control of urban pests is still primarily achieved with insecticides, which have continually improved over time. However, their use has selected for the evolution of resistance to several compound classes across broad geographical areas and multiple species. Resistance results from several types of mechanisms: altered inherited behavioral repertoires that reduce chemical exposure, modified target sites, increased metabolism, and reduced penetration, which have recently been shown to have several specific underlying causes. Overall, the literature portrays a complex resistance landscape that highlights the importance of comprehensive, multifaceted approaches to maintain effective control. New technologies and approaches for resistance management are also discussed, with emphasis on improved chemical control measures via novel synergists and insecticides from both natural and synthetic sources.
PUBMED_42756954	PubMed	2026	Exploring the impacts of wildlife trade on zoonotic spillover and disease outbreaks: A multiple-perspective study. The emergence of zoonotic pathogens from wildlife poses a major global health threat, contributing to frequent and impactful disease outbreaks. While wildlife trade is recognized as a key driver of zoonotic spillover, no studies have quantitatively assessed how trade volume relates to the occurrence and frequency of emerging infectious diseases (EIDs) at a global scale, especially regarding the impact of extreme volumes. This study addresses this gap by conducting a multiple-perspective analysis on country-level yearly zoonotic EID data from 1975 to 2013 using a Bayesian zero-inflated negative binomial spatiotemporal model combined with extreme value theory to evaluate the influence of wildlife trade on EID occurrence, frequency and extreme events. After adjusting for reporting bias and conducting rigorous sensitivity analyses, we find that wildlife import volume significantly increases the probability of zoonotic EID occurrence and extreme outbreaks, but does not affect the frequency. In contrast, wildlife export volume shows no significant impact on either EID occurrence or frequency, and a much weaker effect on extreme events. Beyond wildlife trade, mammalian richness and socioeconomic indicators exhibit complex associations with EID patterns mediated by the varying effectiveness of national disease surveillance systems. This integrated methodology advances understanding of zoonotic disease drivers and underscores a critical import-driven risk profile, suggesting that pandemic prevention strategies should prioritize biosecurity and regulation at wildlife importation points.
PUBMED_42738526	PubMed	2026	Extended-Spectrum -Lactamase-Producing Enterobacterales in Free-Roaming Cats in Israel. Amid the rising prevalence of antimicrobial resistance (AMR), attention is increasingly directed toward investigating additional factors that may contribute to or mediate its development, among which companion animals have emerged as a potential reservoir and transmission interface. Despite this, the contribution of free-roaming animal populations living in proximity to humans and domestic animals has yet to be thoroughly investigated worldwide. Accordingly, this study aimed to determine the prevalence and antimicrobial resistance patterns of extended-spectrum -lactamase (ESBL)-producing Enterobacterales in free-roaming cats in Israel. Rectal swabs were collected from 214 free-roaming cats admitted to two veterinary clinics between 2023 and 2024. ESBL-PE were recovered from 51 cats (23.8%), yielding 61 isolates, which were tested for susceptibility to multiple antimicrobials. Eleven bacterial species were identified, with Escherichia coli being the most frequently recovered (62.3%, 38/61). Nine purposively selected E. coli isolates underwent whole-genome sequencing (WGS). Multidrug resistance (MDR), defined as non-susceptibility to at least one agent in three or more antimicrobial categories, was observed in 72.1% (44/61) of isolates, and four isolates were carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales (CPE). These findings suggest that free-roaming cats may serve as a previously overlooked 'One Health' link, possibly connecting environmental contamination to human and animal health risks.
PUBMED_42699875	PubMed	2026	Extraneural cysticercosis mimicking soft-tissue tumors: a case report from a low-resource setting. INTRODUCTION AND IMPORTANCE: Extraneural cysticercosis (ECC), caused by the larval stage of Taenia solium, is a major diagnostic challenge in endemic regions such as sub-Saharan Africa. ECC frequently presents as a nonspecific, solitary soft-tissue mass, easily mimicking benign tumors and leading to delayed management. This case series highlights the varied clinical spectrum of ECC in western Uganda, following the SCARE criteria. CASE PRESENTATION: We report two clinically distinct cases of ECC at demographic extremes: a 6-year-old male with an acute intramuscular mass in the rectus abdominis, and a 65-year-old female with a 7-year history of a subcutaneous chest wall mass, both of which were clinically indistinguishable from benign tumors. Definitive diagnoses were established in both cases by histopathological examination of surgically excised specimens, which revealed the characteristic Cysticercus cellulosae scolex. Complete surgical excision was curative. CLINICAL DISCUSSION: These cases underscore the diagnostic difficulty of ECC across disparate age groups (pediatric and elderly) and varying chronicity (2 weeks vs. 7 years). The first case highlighted the risk of systemic dissemination; the second demonstrated the fibrotic burnout stage. Both cases confirm histopathology as the gold standard for definitive diagnosis, particularly in resource-limited settings where advanced diagnostics are often inaccessible. CONCLUSION: ECC must remain a key differential diagnosis for any unexplained soft tissue mass in endemic areas. The reliance on and proficiency in histopathology are critical for definitive diagnosis. These findings serve as a public health sentinel, demanding integrated One Health strategies to interrupt the Taenia solium transmission cycle.
PUBMED_42691088	PubMed	2026	Extreme climatic events drive consistent and predictable shifts in soil antibiotic resistance genes. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a growing One Health challenge, and as climate warming intensifies extreme events, it remains unclear how these disturbances affect soil antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs). Here we analyzed the data from a controlled experiment using soils from 30 grassland sites across ten European countries, which simulated drought, flooding, freeze-thaw, and heatwaves to explore ARG dynamics. Overall, ARGs exhibited relatively small but highly consistent shifts across treatments. Heatwaves caused the strongest reductions in ARG abundance and in their linkages with mobile genetic elements (MGEs), a pattern that may reflect a hypothesized metabolic-genetic trade-off, in which microbial investment may shift from core metabolism toward stress signaling and structural maintenance. ARG dynamics during and after disturbance were governed by distinct soil physicochemical properties, with temperature and nutrient status determining acute responses, whereas soil moisture and seasonal variability in temperature and precipitation shaped longer-term legacy effects. Cross-validated random-forest models showed positive predictive performance for Bray-Curtis-based compositional responses within the environmental range represented by the 30 grassland sites. Our findings enhance the understanding of how soil ARGs respond to extreme climatic events and provide a step toward predicting extreme-event impacts on soil resistomes with relevance to One Health.
PUBMED_42683297	PubMed	2026	Factors influencing feline antiparasitic prescriptions by veterinarians and demographics across parts of the UK. BACKGROUND: Antiparasitic drugs used in companion animals may persist in the environment, contributing to ecological contamination and raising One Health concerns. Understanding behavioural patterns of veterinarians' prescription is essential for development of effective antiparasitic stewardship programmes. METHODS: A survey of 29 questions was completed between 22 February and 6 March 2024 by 16 qualified veterinary surgeons selected through non-probability convenience sampling. The online platform JISC enabled creation and distribution of the survey. Descriptive statistics including percentages for the Likert-scale questions were used to explore nominal and ordinal data alongside the collection of demographic data. RESULTS: Ease of administration was a primary consideration for 81% of respondents and client preference strongly influenced 44% of veterinarians in product selection. Only 6% of respondents agreed that environmental contamination and drug resistance guided their prescribing. Prophylactic administration was recognised as the most effective strategy by 63% of respondents. Notably only 38% of participants actively kept up to date with parasite treatment guidelines. LIMITATIONS: The sample size was 16 veterinarians and the geographic distribution of participants was limited. CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights regional and demographic factors influencing feline antiparasitic prescribing, emphasising the need for expanded surveillance beyond the studied UK regions. Despite growing concerns about environmental contamination and drug resistance, these factors have a minimal impact on antiparasitic prescribing practices.
PUBMED_42706609	PubMed	2026	Farming reshapes the gut resistome, virulome, and mobilome of Cervidae. The rapid expansion of cervid farming raises concerns about antimicrobial resistance (AMR) dissemination, yet its impact on the Cervidae gut microbiome remains poorly characterized. We integrated 89 newly sequenced fecal metagenomes with 599 publicly available datasets, comprising 285 metagenomes from farmed cervids and 370 from wild cervids, to construct a catalog of 15,494 non-redundant metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) representing 2,401 species. Our analysis demonstrates that farming profoundly reshapes the gut microbiome's functional composition. Specifically, farmed cervids exhibited significantly higher relative abundance, diversity, and heterogeneity of antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) compared to wild counterparts. We observed a robust synergistic relationship between ARGs, virulence factor genes, and mobile genetic element (MGE)-associated genes, identifying 70 ARG-MGE combinations as evidence of potential horizontal gene transfer. Plasmid profiling further suggested that a subset of ARGs may be associated with conjugative plasmids, with plasmid-associated ARGs being significantly more abundant in farmed than in wild cervids. Virome analyses indicated that bacteriophages, particularly Siphoviridae, may serve as mobile reservoirs for ARGs. Notably, Cervidae shared 268 ARG types with humans, including 23 high-risk genes associated with resistance to clinically important antibiotics (e.g. tetX1, vanRD, and bla-CTX-M-178), with Escherichia coli as a key cross-host carrier. These findings highlight that human-impacted cervid gut microbiomes are significant environmental reservoirs of clinically relevant AMR, underscoring the necessity for enhanced antibiotic stewardship and resistance surveillance in managed wildlife within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42762897	PubMed	2026	Fascioliasis and anisakidosis highlight the need for integrated One Health approaches to food safety and security. Food-borne parasitic diseases pose an escalating challenge to global food security, public health, and sustainable food systems, particularly in the context of climate change, environmental disturbance, globalised food trade, and shifting dietary practices. Within a One Health framework, fascioliasis and anisakidosis represent two globally distributed and increasingly important helminth zoonoses that span terrestrial and aquatic food systems, affecting livestock, fisheries, and human populations. Fascioliasis, caused by Fasciola spp., remains a major constraint on livestock productivity and a neglected human disease linked to the consumption of contaminated freshwater plants and water, while anisakidosis, caused by anisakid nematodes, is an emerging seafood-borne zoonosis associated with raw or undercooked marine products and allergic disease. Both infections are recognized by the FAO/WHO of the United Nations and are listed among the top-ranked food-borne parasites of global public health importance, reflecting their disease burden, wide geographic distribution, and implications for food safety. This review synthesizes current knowledge on the epidemiology, transmission pathways, clinical manifestations, and socio-economic impacts of fascioliasis and anisakidosis, with particular emphasis on their relevance to global food security and Advancing One Health. By examining these two complementary case studies, this review underscores the urgent need for integrated surveillance, improved diagnostic capacity, effective prevention strategies, and cross-sectoral collaboration to mitigate the impact of food-borne helminth zoonoses and to safeguard the safety, resilience, and sustainability of global food systems.
PUBMED_42726670	PubMed	2026	Fatal Infection with Dengue Virus and Avian Orthoavulavirus 1 in Traveler Returning from Saudi Arabia to France, 2025. A previously healthy 26-year-old man died of hemorrhagic fever with fulminant hepatitis and shock 36 hours after returning to France from Mecca, Saudi Arabia. Postmortem analyses detected low-level dengue virus RNA and positive NS1 antigen along with unexpected extremely high-titer disseminated velogenic avian orthoavulavirus 1 infection with elevated systemic cytokine responses.
PUBMED_42769806	PubMed	2026	Fifty years of the Canadian Field Epidemiology Program (1975-2025): Reflecting on the past, shaping the future. Since 1975, the Canadian Field Epidemiology Program (CFEP) has strengthened Canada's public health capacity by training field epidemiologists through a two-year, service-oriented model that integrates formal learning with field placements and mentorship. Established at the request of the provinces and territories and modelled after the United States' Epidemic Intelligence Service, CFEP has evolved into a nationally distributed surge and analytic capability embedded across jurisdictions. Over five decades, trainees and alumni have supported outbreak and emergency response, strengthened surveillance systems, and produced applied evidence that has informed control measures and policy, spanning foodborne and environmental events, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), H1N1, COVID-19, and emerging One Health threats. The CFEP's impact also reflects deliberate workforce development through structured mentorship, cohort-based learning, and alumni networks that extend expertise across federal, provincial, territorial, academic, and international settings. As public health risks grow more complex due to climate-related hazards, rapid digital change, and challenges to trust, this commentary argues that CFEP must remain adaptive, deepen cross-sector partnerships, and embed equity, reconciliation, and systems thinking to sustain Canada's health security over the next 50 years.
PUBMED_42783989	PubMed	2026	First Isolation of Candida parapsilosis from Water-Related Domestic Environments in Colombia: A Public Health Concern? BACKGROUND: Candida parapsilosis is an opportunistic yeast of increasing clinical importance, with fluconazole resistance rates rising globally and reaching concerning levels in clinical settings across several countries, including Colombia. However, the occurrence of antifungal-resistant Candida species in domestic water systems in the country remains largely unexplored. METHODS: This cross-sectional study assessed the occurrence and antifungal susceptibility of Candida spp. in intradomiciliary water from 104 households in Villavicencio, Colombia, during two monitoring periods. Water samples were filtered, and yeast-like colonies were identified using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Susceptibility to fluconazole, amphotericin B, and anidulafungin was determined using the CLSI broth microdilution method. The ERG11 gene was sequenced in the fluconazole-resistant isolate. RESULTS: C. parapsilosis was recovered from 16 of 104 households (15.4%), yielding 22 isolates distributed across six communes. Most isolates (72.7%) were obtained from household water storage tanks. One isolate was resistant to fluconazole (MIC 8 g/mL) and harbored a nonsynonymous R398I substitution in ERG11. CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first report of C. parapsilosis, including a fluconazole-resistant isolate carrying an ERG11 substitution, recovered from domestic water in Colombia. These findings suggest that household water storage tanks may serve as environmental reservoirs for this opportunistic yeast. The implications for human exposure remain to be determined and highlight the need for integrated One Health surveillance.
PUBMED_42745309	PubMed	2026	First Report of Enterocytozoon bieneusi, Encephalitozoon spp. and Blastocystis spp. in Hair Goats in T rkiye. INTRODUCTION: Blastocystis spp., Enterocytozoon bieneusi and Encephalitozoon spp. are prevalent zoonotic gastrointestinal parasites that cause severe diarrhoea and enteric diseases in humans and animals worldwide. This study investigated the molecular occurrence, genetic diversity and zoonotic potential of E. bieneusi, Blastocystis spp. and Encephalitozoon spp. in domestic hair goats in Central Anatolia. METHODS: A total of 300 faecal samples were collected from hair goats in Kayseri, Aksaray and Sivas Provinces and genomic DNA was extracted from these samples. The presence of the three pathogens was detected using PCR and nested PCR targeting the SSU rRNA for Blastocystis spp., the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) for E. bieneusi and Encephalitozoon spp., respectively. Positive PCR products were sequenced to determine the species, subtypes and genotypes of the pathogens. RESULTS: The overall prevalence rates of E. bieneusi and Blastocystis spp. were 5.3% (16/300) and 6.7% (20/300), respectively. None of the faecal samples tested was positive for Encephalitozoon spp. and no co-infections among these three pathogens were detected. The SSU rRNA sequence analysis revealed Blastocystis spp. ST10, a subtype predominantly associated with animals. Additionally, one known E. bieneusi genotype (BEB6) was identified. The BEB6 genotype falls into zoonotic Group 2 of E. bieneusi in the phylogenetic tree. CONCLUSION: Our study is the first report of Blastocystis spp. and E. bieneusi infection in hair goats in T rkiye, highlighting their potential role in zoonotic transmission within a One Health framework. Our results provide scientific data for the prevention and control of these two intestinal pathogens. Further investigations are necessary to better understand their genetic characteristics and zoonotic potential in T rkiye.
PUBMED_42696055	PubMed	2026	First case of Brucella suis biovar 1 infection in a dog in Switzerland. As one of the most common zoonoses globally, brucellosis threatens not only animals but also humans with Brucella (B.) melitensis, B. abortus and B. suis biovar 1 3, being more virulent for humans than B. canis, B. ovis and B. suis biovar 2. Canine brucellosis is caused mainly by B. canis, however, B. suis infections in dogs have been reported sporadically in Europe and more frequently in Australia. B. suis infection in dogs is mainly associated with hunting or wild-animal exposure and rarely with consumption of commercial raw meat products. In Switzerland, B. canis is sporadically diagnosed in dogs and B. suis biovar 2 is present in wild boar and brown hare. We report a case of brucellosis in a dog from Switzerland, neither having a history of hunting nor travel-associated risk of exposure. The intact male dog showed clinical signs (fever and epididymitis) consistent with brucellosis, which was confirmed by culture and molecular methods in urine and by serological methods. Culture and subsequent whole genome sequencing revealed the isolate as B. suis biovar 1, ST-14. The most closely related strain was shown to be a strain isolated in 2021 from a dog in Germany. Based on the lack of any previous report, infection by B. suis in dogs has not previously been diagnosed in Switzerland. This case highlights the need for vigilance regarding this less expected pathogen of high zoonotic importance in dogs.
PUBMED_42750870	PubMed	2026	First report of Centrocestus formosanus infection associated with mass mortality in the critically endangered Chinese Bahaba (Bahaba taipingensis). Centrocestus formosanus is a pathogenic heterophyid trematode traditionally known to infect freshwater teleosts, but increasingly recognized for its expanding range into brackish and coastal ecosystems.This study documents the first natural spillover of C. formosanus into the critically endangered marine euryhaline fish, Chinese bahaba (Bahaba taipingensis), which naturally inhabits both high-salinity seawater and brackish estuaries. A devastating disease outbreak accompanied by mass mortality occurred between November 2025 and January 2026 at an aquaculture base in Panyu, Guangzhou, China. B. taipingensis was maintained in low-salinity brackish water (3-5 ) as a result of its euryhaline tolerance. Notably, this low salinity (3-5 ) is known to be the most permissive range for cercarial survival and host-seeking behavior, thereby creating an ecological window for trematode infection. Among the 10 infected fish examined, all exhibited excessive gill mucus and dense macroscopic white spots across the gill filaments. Encysted metacercariae were morphologically identified and molecularly confirmed via 28S rRNA gene sequencing, displaying 99.96% sequence identity to reference strains C. formosanus (MG738251.1 and OR671446.1).Parasitological quantification revealed an exceptionally high mean infection intensity (3832 473 parasites per fish). Histopathological evaluation demonstrated catastrophic branchial remodeling, prominently characterized by host-derived granuloma encapsulation, pronounced tissue fibrosis, lamellar epithelial hypertrophy, widespread lamellar atrophy and fusion, and severe localized swelling of the gill filaments. Diagnostic screening ruled out the presence of concomitant bacterial or viral pathogens. This first documentation of C. formosanus in this euryhaline sciaenid underscores the acute vulnerability and extremely low tolerance of B. taipingensis to this heterophyid fluke, highlighting a critical and previously unrecognized parasitic threat to the conservation and population recovery of this endangered species.
PUBMED_42724978	PubMed	2026	Food safety-oriented climate adaptation strategies in pastoral dairy systems of developing countries: A scoping review. Pastoral dairy systems provide livelihoods for millions of inhabitants of arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs) in developing countries. However, these systems are threatened by adverse climate change. Complex and erratic rainfall patterns, increasing temperatures, and more frequent droughts are not only reducing milk production but also exacerbating risks to its safety. This scoping review synthesizes evidence from peer-reviewed scientific articles published between 2000 and 2025, retrieved from publicly available databases, to examine the effects of climate stressors on milk safety in smallholder pastoral dairy systems in the ASAL regions of Africa and Asia. The review finds that the most commonly reported climate-related risks are drought (37.5%), rainfall variability and heat stress (30%), and flooding (7.5%). These stressors contribute to extensive microbial contamination, including Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella spp., and Brucella spp., as well as chemical hazards such as aflatoxins and antibiotic residues which constitute food safety challenges that should be addressed within a One Health framework. A combination of technological, ecological, behavioral and indigenous approaches has been employed as adaptation strategies to reduce climate change impacts. These include solar-powered milk cooling, rainwater harvesting and borehole development, herd diversification into drought-resistant species, and traditional smoke fumigation of milk containers. Additional innovations, such as rapid on-farm diagnostics, aflatoxin biocontrol, and training of milk handlers, also show potential for improving climate change adaptation. Nonetheless, adaptation interventions remain fragmented, hazard-specific, and insufficiently integrated into broader food safety frameworks. These findings imply that prioritizing milk safety within climate adaptation strategies could substantially safeguard public health and sustain pastoral livelihoods amid increasing climatic uncertainty.
PUBMED_42789120	PubMed	2026	Forecast-Driven Dynamic Physician Staffing in a Pediatric Emergency Department: A Prospective Quasi-Experimental Pilot Study. Emergency department crowding is a persistent threat to acute care quality, yet predictive models for ED demand have rarely been translated into prospective operational staffing interventions. Here we report a prospective single-center quasi-experimental pilot study evaluating forecast-driven dynamic physician scheduling in the pediatric ED of Hacettepe University Ihsan Dogramaci Children's Hospital (December 2024 to May 2025). Using a deep learning demand forecasting model (TiDE-RIN) combined with linear programming, we determined daily physician counts (range 3 to 6) for evening shifts (16:00 to 24:00) during days 1 to 15 of each month; days 16 to end of month maintained the institution's standard fixed four-physician schedule. Among after-hours visits with valid disposition timestamps (n 9,626), mean post-evaluation length of stay (PE-LOS) was 175.9 min in the intervention arm and 184.0 min in the control arm (unadjusted difference 8.2 min; propensity-score-matched 7.9 min, median 10.0; stabilised inverse-probability weighting 8.5 min). Because staffing was allocated by calendar day, inference was clustered on the 182 study days: the two-way fixed-effects arm contrast was a reduction of 8.9 min (95% CI - 22.5 to + 4.8; p 0.20) and the fully covariate-adjusted contrast 11.0 min (95% CI - 24.4 to + 2.5; p 0.11). All design-consistent specifications placed the reduction between 4 and 11 min, none excluded no effect under day-level clustering, and the pilot was not powered for a difference of this size. Diagnostic testing was modestly lower (any-test rate 0.51 versus 0.54; p 0.009). Effects were concentrated among lower-acuity patients and during the early-evening demand peak, and the optimised schedule allocated physicians demand-responsively (mean 4.31 versus 4.00 per shift) with no signal of compromised short-term patient safety, although per-physician workload effects did not reach significance in this pilot. Spillover analysis confirmed no progressive improvement in the concurrent control period. In this prospective pilot, coupling deep learning demand forecasting with optimisation-based physician scheduling was associated with a consistent but modest reduction in PE-LOS whose confidence interval included no effect, supporting feasibility and motivating multi-centre evaluation, and directly addressing the translational gap between predictive model development and real-world clinical implementation.
PUBMED_42705670	PubMed	2026	Forest Health: a pilot study on feasibility and exploratory outcomes of a modular forest therapy intervention in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. INTRODUCTION: Nature-based interventions aimed at promoting health, enhancing well-being and supporting medical treatment have long been a focus of public health research. In particular, forest therapy and forest bathing are well established in Asia as evidence-informed approaches to stress reduction. In Europe, research on forest therapy is expanding although the field remains comparatively young. Existing studies have mainly focused on the short-term effects of single forest visits while evidence on multiweek interventions and potential medium-term to long-term effects remains limited. The project Forest Health (Wald Gesund), embedded within the research consortium T!Raum-Initiative One-Health-Region Pomerania located in northern Germany, aims to address this gap by developing a structured forest therapy intervention tailored to three different target groups. METHODS AND ANALYSIS: The study protocol describes a pilot study to evaluate a modular forest therapy intervention with regard to feasibility indicators as well as stress-related and symptom-related exploratory outcomes. A total of 120 participants will be recruited across three target groups: community-dwelling adults aged 65 years and older, adults with arterial hypertension and adults with depressive symptoms recruited from treatment waiting lists. Using a multimethod approach, two preliminary studies were conducted: a survey of community-dwelling individuals in the region and focus groups with regional stakeholders. Additionally, a 2-week pilot study of the intervention was conducted. Based on these findings, a 4-week modular forest therapy intervention will be implemented. Participants will be assigned to intervention modules with distinct content using a quasi-randomised procedure. The intervention will follow a pre-post design with follow-up assessments. Feasibility indicators will be assessed as key process outcomes. The primary exploratory outcome will be stress while secondary exploratory outcomes will include psychological and physiological health-related measures. ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University Medicine Greifswald. Participants will provide informed consent, receive information about potential risks and support options. The results will be disseminated through scientific publications, conferences and public outreach. TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study protocol is preregistered on the Open Science Framework (OSF; Registration DOI: 10.17605/OSF.IO/C2D5P; last update 16 December 2025).
PUBMED_42705771	PubMed	2026	From commensal to pathobiont: The emergence of virulence-enhanced Escherichia coli in China's food-animal systems - insights with future implications. A fundamental shift in Escherichia coli epidemiology is being driven by convergence of virulence determinants and antimicrobial resistance within linked human-animal-environment systems. In China, the rapid growth of food-animal production, extensive antimicrobial use, and complex food networks are accelerating the emergence and dissemination of virulence-enhanced E. coli pathobionts. This review synthesizes recent epidemiological, genomics, and outbreak data to characterize China's evolving landscape of food-animal-associated E. coli. We highlight a significant shift from classical pathotypes to hybrid lineages that simultaneously carry virulence factors and last-resort antibiotic resistance determinants, including mcr-1, tet(X4), and blaNDM. These traits disseminate rapidly via plasmid-mediated horizontal gene transfer, facilitating rapid adaptation and enabling cross-sectoral One Health transmission. National surveillance, foodborne outbreak investigations, and whole-genome sequencing data show that food-animal reservoirs are active evolutionary niches that drive pathogen diversity and fitness, rather than serving merely as contamination sources. Whole-genome sequencing also pinpoints high-risk clones (e.g., ST394) and plasmid-mediated co-selection of virulence and AMR. The emergence of hybrid pathotypes (e.g., STEC/ETEC) and AMR-virulence co-selection challenges traditional classification and limits the effectiveness of conventional surveillance approaches. The 2017 colistin ban reduced mcr-1, yet ongoing resistance and emerging tet(X4) demand integrated surveillance. Collectively, these findings call for reconceptualizing E. coli as a dynamic genomic entity embedded within a unified ecological network. Addressing this threat requires an integrated One Health strategy including genomic surveillance, agricultural antimicrobial stewardship, and coordinated food-environment-clinical monitoring to prevent high-risk clone emergence and global spread.
PUBMED_42729641	PubMed	2026	From fragmentation to coordination: strengthening One Health research to support H5N1 preparedness in Cambodia. OBJECTIVES: Highly pathogenic avian influenza A (H5N1) remains a major zoonotic threat, characterized by persistent transmission in Cambodia since its re-emergence in 2023. Despite strengthened surveillance and the establishment of the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee on One Health, limited integration of research across sectors constrains preparedness and response. This viewpoint examines how research supports the One Health system in Cambodia. METHODS: This viewpoint draws on insights obtained from the first national multistakeholder workshop on H5N1, held in March 2026. RESULTS: Fragmentation across epidemiological, clinical, behavioral, environmental, and genomic domains limits the generation of actionable evidence and delays its translation into policy. CONCLUSION: We propose the establishment of a multisectoral technical working group on H5N1 research embedded within the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee on One Health to align research priorities, strengthen data integration, and improve evidence-to-policy translation. This approach could enhance national preparedness while simultaneously positioning Cambodia as a model for coordinated One Health research in the Western Pacific region and beyond.
PUBMED_42774677	PubMed	2026	From principles to binding rules: A one health governance readiness analysis of Saudi Arabia's AI health policy against global regulatory benchmarks. BACKGROUND: AI is entering clinical care, disease surveillance, and health-data systems faster than governance frameworks can accommodate. Stakes for public health systems include algorithmic safety in diagnosis and triage, data interoperability, and workforce capacity to supervise AI tools safely. Saudi Arabia has built substantial AI health governance infrastructure through its Data and Artificial Intelligence Authority and Food and Drug Authority, but no binding, AI-specific health law had been enacted as of mid-2026. METHODS: A ten-dimension governance scoring framework anchored in WHO and EU AI Act standards covered legal bindingness, risk classification, health-specific AI provisions, transparency, post-market surveillance, data governance/interoperability, independent auditing, codified ethics, and workforce/capacity building. Nineteen policy documents across Saudi Arabia, the EU, the USA, and China were scored 0-2 (absent, partial/non-binding, codified/binding), citing source passages. A genuine second coder was unavailable; reliability was assessed via single-coder self-consistency on a random subsample, and a separate post-hoc construct-validity review checked cross-jurisdictional consistency of rubric application. RTGI (Regulatory Transition Gap Index) was computed under two weighting schemes and stress-tested with a randomized-weight sensitivity sweep. RESULTS: Saudi Arabia scored 15 of 20 (RTGI 0.25), second only to the EU (16/20, RTGI 0.20) and ahead of the USA (14/20, RTGI 0.30) and China (6/20, RTGI 0.70; sensitivity band 5-11/20 accounting for translation limitations). Rank order was stable across weighting schemes and a 1000-draw randomized-weight sensitivity sweep (China's largest-gap position held in 99.3% of draws; full baseline order reproduced in 53.5% of draws). Single-coder self-consistency agreement on a random subsample was 83.3% (kappa 0.64, substantial). Saudi Arabia's largest gaps were independent third-party conformity assessment, data governance/interoperability, codified ethics, and workforce/capacity building. CONCLUSIONS: Saudi Arabia's AI health governance is strong on device-specific technical guidance but relies on internal quality-management auditing rather than independent third-party conformity assessment, and has not converted ethics principles into binding rules with the public-health reach of the EU AI Act. Four near-term actions are identified to close the highest-priority gaps.
PUBMED_42719189	PubMed	2026	From spillover to systems: evidence gaps in One Health preparedness for emerging infectious diseases in Latin America and the Caribbean. Latin America and the Caribbean are a global hotspot for emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases, yet regional One Health preparedness remains uneven and incompletely operationalized. This narrative Mini Review synthesizes evidence published mainly between 2015 and 2026 on One Health preparedness for emerging infectious diseases in the region, emphasizing how environmental disruption and climate change shape zoonotic and vector-borne spillover risk. Available regional surveys suggest broad professional familiarity with the One Health concept but limited operational implementation, with environmental health frequently identified as the least-integrated domain. We argue that spillover risk-and the failure to detect and contain spillover once it occurs-should be understood as a system-level outcome shaped by ecological disruption, socioeconomic vulnerability, surveillance capacity, and governance, rather than as an isolated biological event: deforestation, agricultural and extractive expansion-including illegal mining and logging-unplanned urbanization, and climate variability generate new human-animal-vector interfaces, while fragmented governance, uneven and poorly decentralized laboratory capacity, and limited reservoir and environmental surveillance leave these interfaces unmonitored. Environmental and climatic drivers are robustly linked to spillover, although the pathways are disease-specific rather than universal, and socioeconomic vulnerability concentrates the resulting burden in Indigenous, rural, and marginalized populations. We identify priority gaps in integrated surveillance, decentralized diagnostics, genomic capacity, reservoir ecology, governance, financing, and equity, and propose an agenda for anticipatory, climate-informed, and context-sensitive preparedness.
PUBMED_42693507	PubMed	2026	Genetic Diversity and Epidemiological Overlap of Staphylococcus aureus at the Animal-Food-Environment-Human Interface Within a One Health Framework. This study aimed to assess the genetic diversity and potential epidemiological overlap of Staphylococcus aureus using molecular (spa and SCCmec typing) and phenotypic characterization of 108 isolates obtained along the farm-to-fork continuum (dairy and meat chains) and 50 human clinical isolates. Forty-four spa types, including 17 novel patterns, were identified, with t11284 and t127 predominating among animal-related MRSA and clinical MRSA, respectively. Six SCCmec types (I-VI) were detected in the majority of isolates (85.2%), with SCCmec IVa prevalent in farm-to-fork isolates (67%) and SCCmec III dominant in clinical isolates (28%). Spa repeat-based MST analysis revealed a heterogeneous distribution of isolates across clusters, with identical spa types detected in multiple source categories, indicating genetic relatedness rather than direct transmission events. Overall, 54.6% of isolates exhibited a multidrug-resistant phenotype. Farm-to-fork isolates showed mainly -lactam resistance ( 85%), whereas clinical MRSA exhibited broader resistance profiles, including high fluoroquinolone resistance ( 92%). PVL was detected in 41 isolates (38%), predominantly in MRSA, and was associated with SCCmec IV/V and diverse spa types. Toxin genes (tst-1, sea, seb, and sed) were mainly confined to clinical MRSA, suggesting source-associated distribution of virulence determinants. Biofilm formation was observed in 49 isolates (45.3%), more frequently among farm-to-fork isolates. Our study demonstrate marked genetic and phenotypic diversity of S. aureus across farm-to-fork and human clinical sources and suggest the presence of shared genetic lineages among isolates from different sources. The results support the importance of integrated One Health surveillance for monitoring antimicrobial-resistant and virulent S. aureus populations across interconnected ecological compartments.
PUBMED_42772571	PubMed	2026	Genetic Diversity of Clade 2.3.4.4b H5Nx High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza Viruses Detected in Korea During the 2025-2026 Winter Season and Pathogenicity of H5N1 and H5N9 Viruses. Clade 2.3.4.4b H5N1, H5N6, and H5N9 high pathogenicity avian influenza viruses (HPAIVs) were detected in poultry and wild birds during the 2025-2026 winter season in Korea. During this period, 62 H5Nx HPAI outbreaks occurred in poultry, and 63 cases were reported in wild birds. Genome constellation analysis revealed substantial genotype diversity. Most H5N1 and H5N9 genotypes were reassortants containing gene segments derived from East Asian clade 2.3.4.4b H5N1 HPAIVs since 2022 and low-pathogenicity avian influenza viruses from wild birds. Notably, the European H5N1 genotype EA-2024-DI.2.1, which spread rapidly across Europe in 2025, and its reassortants were identified in Korea. The novel poultry genotypes were also detected in wild birds, supporting wild bird to poultry spillover, whereas one genotype detected in previous season was identified in small-scale poultry farms. H5N1 (C588) of major 25G2 genotype in poultry and H5N9 (C722) of N9-G2 genotype showed high infectivity in chickens with 103.3 and 103.2 EID50 of median lethal dose (LD50) values, respectively. The predominance of the 25G2 genotype in poultry may have been influenced by efficient infection and virus introduction into high-density poultry production areas, potentially facilitating horizontal transmission under field conditions. In young ducks, H5N1 caused rapid mortality, whereas H5N9 induced limited clinical signs without mortality. Both viruses were transmitted to all contact ducks, increasing the risk of transmission to poultry. Despite intensified surveillance and early detection efforts to limit virus spread, H5Nx HPAIV outbreaks occurred during the 2025-2026 winter season. These findings highlight the need for continued surveillance, together with rapid genomic and pathogenic characterization of newly introduced viruses.
PUBMED_42676023	PubMed	2026	Genome-informed structural analysis of polymerase and glycoprotein adaptation in H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b. IMPORTANCE: Understanding the molecular mechanisms driving H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b is critical for pandemic preparedness. OBJECTIVE: To characterize the molecular drivers of viral fitness and mammalian adaptability in recent H5N1 viruses by integrating evolutionary dynamics with structural simulations. METHODS: This study analyzed 2,398 H5Nx genomes (2000-2024) through phylogenetic and selective pressure analyses. HA/NA structures were predicted with AlphaFold 3 and evaluated by AutoDock4 docking, whereas polymerase-ANP32A/B complexes were modeled using template-based methods and their binding free energies were estimated using MM/GBSA. Polymerase-ANP32E complexes were predicted with AlphaFold 3 and similarly evaluated by MM/GBSA. The binding affinities ( G) for the sialic acid (SA) receptors and human ANP32 proteins were quantified through molecular mechanics/generalized born surface area calculations. RESULTS: Clade 2.3.4.4b showed significant antigenic drift in the HA receptor binding site, reducing affinity for 2,3-SA and 2,6-SA receptors. On the other hand, the emergence of a full-length stalk N1 NA with second sialic acid-binding site mutations (e.g., N366S) compensated for reduced HA affinity by enhancing the NA binding stability. In the polymerase complex, both the PB2-627E/631L variant (-144.00 kcal/mol; unadjusted p 0.0058) and the known mammalian-adaptive 627K/631M variant (-144.67 kcal/mol; unadjusted p 0.0165) showed more favorable predicted human ANP32B binding free energies than the ancestral 627E/631M state (-136.46 kcal/mol). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The co-occurrence of HA, NA, PB1, and PB2 signatures was associated with clade expansion and produced structural predictions consistent with altered receptor or ANP32 interactions; experimental validation is required before inferring effects on fitness or zoonotic risk.
PUBMED_42747631	PubMed	2026	Genomic Analysis of CTX-M-15-Producing E. coli Colonizing a Rescued Capuchin Monkey. Illegal wild animal trade and possession represents a threat to One Health due to the pathogens exchange between wild animals and humans. We report the detection and genomic characterization of a multidrug-resistant (MDR) Escherichia coli strain (MP02) colonizing a capuchin monkey (Sapajus sp.) rescued from illegal possession. MP02 exhibited ExPEC-related genes, harbored an IncHI2-ST1 plasmid composed of quinolones, aminoglycosides, and sulfonamides resistance genes, besides the extended-spectrum -lactamase (ESBL)-encoding gene blaCTX-M-15 located in a conserved Tn3-like transposon. To the author's knowledge, this is the first report and genomic analysis of a MDR bacterium isolated from an illegally traded non-human primate.
PUBMED_42705734	PubMed	2026	Genomic and One Health insights into Vibrio parahaemolyticus from environmental, seafood and clinical sources. Vibrio parahaemolyticus is a leading cause of seafood-borne gastroenteritis worldwide, with climate warming facilitating its spread to high-latitude areas. In this study, we analyzed 212 genomes of environmental and seafood-associated isolates collected from seven cities in Zhejiang Province, China (2019-2024), alongside 228 clinical genomes from public databases. The 212 isolates were assigned to 172 sequence types (STs), with ST490 being the most frequent (5/212, 2.36%). Forty-four serotypes were identified, dominated by OL3:KUT (12.68%). High ST and serotype diversity were observed across different sample types and sources, with median pairwise single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) ranging from 57,431 to 58,378, indicating comparable genetic diversity across groups. All isolates carried tlh and T3SS1 but lacked tdh and T3SS2. Resistance rates against ampicillin and cefazolin were 54.72% (116/212) and 44.34% (94/212), respectively, with multidrug resistance (MDR) detected in nine isolates, predominantly from seafood (7/9). A total of 63 distinct antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) spanning seven classes were identified. Isolates from aquaculture farms and wet markets exhibited greater resistance category diversity and higher ARG carriage than those from coastal or riverine sites. In contrast, the 228 clinical isolates harbored only 25 ARGs across two classes, with a significantly lower proportion of isolates carrying multiple ARG classes (0.44% vs. 6.13%, P 0.001). Human isolates formed tighter phylogenetic clusters, although a minority were closely related to environmental/foodborne strains. Overall, our findings demonstrate the genetic diversity and resistance potential of V. parahaemolyticus across environmental, seafood, and clinical sources, highlighting the importance of the One Health approach to comprehensive public health risk assessment.
PUBMED_42741334	PubMed	2026	Genomic and ecological systems-thinking framework for pathogenic Leptospira in Puerto Rico. INTRODUCTION: Leptospirosis is a complex zoonotic disease requiring high-resolution surveillance. A systems-thinking framework was used to connect genomic and ecological data and map the geographic and host-based structuring of co-circulating pathogenic Leptospira lineages in Puerto Rico. METHODS: Forty-four core genomes of L. interrogans, L. borgpetersenii, and L. kirschneri from human, domestic, and wildlife hosts were analyzed. Spatiotemporal and landscape metadata were integrated using root-to-tip regression, isolation-by-distance profiling and calibrated single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) thresholds ( 1, 5, and 10 SNPs) to define transmission clusters. RESULTS: Leptospira species exhibited distinct ecological pathways partitioned by geography, explaining 56% of genomic variance for L. interrogans and 91% for L. borgpetersenii (PERMANOVA). L. interrogans displayed high landscape connectivity across multiple hosts, forming localized networks ( 1 to 10 SNPs) that capture active spillovers (human-to-rat linkages at 1 SNP) and resolved into rodent host-specific lineages (R2 0.34). Conversely, L. borgpetersenii showed spatial and temporal genomic homogeneity and a lack of host-associated structure within an unpartitioned transmission pool dominated by Mus musculus. As a result, fixed genomic thresholds yielded disparate outcomes: L. interrogans resolved into 4 to 5 discrete, expanding clusters, whereas L. borgpetersenii grouped into a single uniform population at the 10-SNP threshold. CONCLUSION: Co-circulating pathogenic leptospires occupy distinct ecological niches shaped by varying host restriction and environmental persistence. Fixed genomic thresholds lack universal applicability; effective genomic epidemiological surveillance must employ species-specific threshold calibration to accurately map transmission pathways.
PUBMED_42671195	PubMed	2026	Genomic architecture of antimicrobial resistance and mobile genetic elements in Salmonella enterica isolated from necropsied cattle in central Kentucky. UNLABELLED: Non-typhoidal Salmonella remains a leading global cause of foodborne disease and an important contributor to the global burden of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) within the One Health framework. Cattle serve as an important reservoir, facilitating the dissemination of antimicrobial-resistant Salmonella through the food chain and the environment. In this study, we analyzed the genomes of 27 Salmonella enterica isolates recovered from necropsied cattle in central Kentucky to characterize their genomic AMR, virulence, and mobile genetic element profiles. Multilocus sequence typing (MLST) identified 12 sequence types (STs), with ST10 (S. Dublin) representing the dominant lineage (25.9%). Genomic screening revealed 4,618 virulence gene occurrences, including conserved factors associated with secretion and adhesion, as well as variable toxin and immune evasion genes. Antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) were detected across the isolate collection, with resistance primarily associated with efflux systems (62.1%) and genes conferring resistance to aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, sulfonamides, phenicols, and -lactams. Plasmids were detected in 77.8% of isolates, integrons were identified in 11.1% of isolates, and prophages and insertion sequence (IS) elements were widely distributed. While most resistance loci were chromosomal (63.5%), plasmid-associated ARGs (11.7%) demonstrated significantly greater proximity to IS elements, suggesting an increased potential for mobilization. Pan-genome analysis revealed an open pan-genome structure with a limited core (19.9%) and a dominant accessory genome (77.6%). Core-genome phylogenetic analysis incorporating 97 publicly available genomes demonstrated close clustering of cattle-associated isolates with isolates from food, human, and environmental sources, suggesting the presence of shared or closely related lineages across interconnected One Health compartments. These findings characterize the genomic architecture of AMR in cattle-associated Salmonella and highlight the potential contribution of mobile genetic elements to shaping AMR evolution and dissemination across interconnected One Health systems. IMPORTANCE: This study reveals that multidrug-resistant Salmonella enterica in cattle is sustained by a dual genomic architecture in which resistance determinants are both chromosomally embedded and mobilized through plasmids, prophages, and insertion sequence (IS) elements. The presence of plasmid-borne resistance genes and IS elements suggests their potential involvement in transposition-mediated dissemination. The predominance of chromosomal resistance may indicate greater persistence of resistance determinants within bacterial lineages. The dominance of the ST10 (S. Dublin) lineage and its close genomic relatedness to food-associated isolates, together with an open pan-genome structure, suggest ongoing circulation and genomic diversification of high-risk lineages across interconnected animal, food, and environmental systems.
PUBMED_42714963	PubMed	2026	Genomic characterization of Lao Mobatvirus strains reveals host-associated clustering in Southeast Asian bats. While members of the genus Orthohantavirus are well-established human pathogens, the zoonotic potential of bat-associated hantavirids, particularly those within the genus Mobatvirus, remains largely unresolved. To investigate the genetic diversity of these lineages in Southeast Asia, we conducted an expanded surveillance programme in Lao PDR from May 2023 to October 2025 in bat populations and wild animals from local wet markets. Using molecular screening and deep sequencing to characterize hantavirids from bat populations and wild animals from local wet markets, we identified 20 positive samples across four bat species, recovering coding-complete genomes for multiple novel variants. Phylogenetic analysis confirmed that these viruses clustered within Mobatvirus, resolving into two major subclades. The first subclade clustered with Quezon and Robina viruses found in fruit-eating bats. The second subclade further split into two lineages corresponding to akr ng and Xu n S n viruses, which are associated with trident and leaf-nosed bats, respectively. Despite the strong host association observed, the detection of these viruses in a wet market highlights this setting as a potential human exposure interface. These findings significantly expand the known diversity of mobatviruses in Laos and highlight the urgent need for serological surveillance in at-risk human populations to assess the potential for spillover.
PUBMED_42675330	PubMed	2026	Genomic characterization of carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales from wastewater reveals the convergence of KPC-2 and GES-16 in Brazil. Carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales (CPE) pose a significant public health concern due to the limited therapeutic options and increasing dissemination outside clinical settings. Wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) have been proposed as relevant environmental reservoirs for antimicrobial-resistant bacteria and mobile genetic elements. In this study, we performed genomic characterization of CPE strains recovered from raw wastewater samples from the influents of different WWTPs. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing revealed multidrug resistance, including coresistance to carbapenems and polymyxins, among Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter asburiae, and Enterobacter kobei strains. Whole-genome sequencing identified the convergence of the blaKPC-2 and blaGES-16 genes, as well as the presence of blaGES-5 in E. kobei sequence type (ST) 540 strains. Moreover, the blaKPC-2 gene was detected in K. pneumoniae strains belonging to high-risk clones ST11 (capsular types KL64 and KL15) and ST307 (capsular type KL102), and E. asburiae ST384. The blaGES-5 and blaGES-16 genes were associated with class 1 integrons, while the blaKPC-2 gene was embedded within transposons (Tn4401a, Tn4401i, and Tn3-like) and insertion sequences (ISKpn27 and ISKpn6). Notably, genomic analyses and literature review demonstrated that the blaGES-16 gene remains unique to Brazil. The putative pathogenic potential of carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae ST11 was also assessed. These findings support the environmental circulation of clinically relevant Enterobacterales genotypes and emphasize the potential role of WWTPs as conduits for CPE dissemination, if not adequately operated. Therefore, genomic surveillance in extra-hospital settings may contribute to a better understanding of antimicrobial resistance ecology and inform One Health mitigation strategies.
PUBMED_42674221	PubMed	2026	Genomic characterization of novel human-associated CTX-M-15-producing Serratia nevei ST625 lineage infecting a vulnerable loggerhead sea turtle. BACKGROUND: Serratia nevei is a newly classified and opportunistic bacterial species belonging to the Serratia marcescens complex (SMC). Genomic data from this species is highly relevant for public health and epidemiological tracking. OBJECTIVE: To report the first identification and genomic characterization of extended-spectrum -lactamase (CTX-M-15)-producing S. nevei sequence type (ST) ST625 lineage infecting a vulnerable loggerhead sea turtle. METHODS: Strain BP02 was recovered from the coelomic cavity of a loggerhead sea turtle (Caretta caretta) admitted to a rehabilitation center in southeastern Brazil. MALDI-TOF MS was initially used for species identification and was further confirmed by whole-genome sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq platform, followed by ANI, dDDH, multilocus sequence typing, resistome, plasmidome, virulome, and SNP-based phylogenomic analyses. RESULTS: Strain BP02 exhibited a multidrug-resistant profile, including resistance to third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins. Genomic analyses identified BP02 as S. nevei ST625 carrying blaCTX-M-15 within the ISEcp1-blaCTX-M-15-wbuC- Tn2 genetic environment, in addition to multiple AMR determinants and the IncC plasmid replicon. Phylogenomic analysis demonstrated close relatedness between BP02 and human clinical ST625 strains, previously reported in S o Paulo, Brazil, including a urine-derived strain isolated in 2019, differing by only 27 SNPs. Notably, all publicly available ST625 genomes were associated with human clinical sources and displayed multidrug resistance genotypes. CONCLUSION: This study expands the current knowledge regarding the ecology and genomic features of S. nevei, demonstrating the emergence of a human multidrug-resistant clone in marine wildlife. Our findings reinforce the importance of monitoring clinically relevant SMC members across distinct ecological niches within a One Health perspective.
PUBMED_42700195	PubMed	2026	Genomic diversity and resistance determinants of staphylococci from cow and buffalo milk. BACKGROUND: Staphylococci are important mastitis pathogens in dairy animals and serve as reservoirs of antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) having zoonotic potential. Genomic characterization of resistant isolates is essential to understand their diversity, resistance mechanisms, and One Health implications. METHODS AND RESULTS: A total of 363 cow and buffalo milk samples-including 108 from animals with mastitis-were screened, yielding 98 staphylococcal isolates, comprising 20 Staphylococcus aureus and 78 coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS). Antimicrobial susceptibility testing revealed resistance to cefoxitin (CoNS: 21.7%; S. aureus: 10%), tetracycline (CoNS: 19.2%; S. aureus: 10%), erythromycin (CoNS:16.7%; S. aureus: 10%), gentamicin (CoNS: 10.2%; S. aureus: 10%) and fluoroquinolone (CoNS: 10.2%), while the majority were sensitive to chloramphenicol, cotrimoxazole ( 95%, each), linezolid ( 97%), and vancomycin (100%). Nineteen isolates, including two S. aureus, were cefoxitin-resistant, and eight carried the mecA gene. Whole genome sequencing of these eight isolates revealed genome sizes ranging from 2.27 to 2.78 MB, with the methicillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA, ERSST98) isolate possessing the largest genome and the highest rRNA copy number. Comparative genomic analysis revealed various SCCmec types along with an extensive array of resistance determinants, encompassing aminoglycosides, macrolides, tetracyclines, efflux systems, and heavy metals, underscoring the multifaceted resistance repertoire of these strains. Virulence profiling of ERSST98 demonstrated a broad arsenal of adhesins, toxins, and biofilm associated genes, highlighting its pathogenic capacity. Mobile genetic elements with diverse plasmid replicons and insertion sequence families further contributed to genomic plasticity. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, this study underscores the genomic diversity of methicillin-resistant staphylococci from dairy animals with extensive resistance determinants and highlights their zoonotic relevance within One Health framework.
PUBMED_42688691	PubMed	2026	Genomic epidemiology of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli across humans, poultry and wastewater sectors in Douala, Cameroon. BACKGROUND: The global health threat of antimicrobial resistance involves the human, animal and environmental sectors. Data from Cameroon are scarce. OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to define extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli (ESBL-Ec) rates and associated risk factors across the three sectors in Douala, Cameroon, and to define molecular characteristics of isolates. METHODS: From June 2022 to May 2023, we collected blood cultures from hospitalized patients, rectal swabs from healthy pregnant women, caeca from broiler chickens and environmental wastewater. Samples were screened for ESBL-Ec using CHROMAgar ESBL and cefotaxime-supplemented Tryptone Bile X-glucuronide agar. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed by disk diffusion following EUCAST guidelines. Whole-genome sequencing was carried out using Illumina technology. RESULTS: Of 628 samples, 374 yielded ESBL-Ec. Prevalence was 54.6% (131/240) in pregnant women, 70.4% (169/240) in chickens and 93.1% (67/72) in wastewater. The proportion of ESBL-Ec among E. coli-positive-blood cultures was 9.2% (7/76). Multi-family household living was independently associated with ESBL-Ec carriage among pregnant women (adjusted odds ratio 1.7, 95% CI 1.0-3.1, P 0.03). High co-resistance ( 70%) was observed for tetracycline, ciprofloxacin and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Sequencing of 32 isolates revealed 45 distinct resistance genes, including blaCTX-M-15 (n 13, 40.6%), blaCTX-M-55 (n 11, 34.4%) and last-resort antibiotic resistance genes mcr-1 and bla OXA-181. High-risk sequence types included ST131 (pregnant women) and ST10 (chickens). Notably, ST48 was shared between pregnant women and chickens, and ST155 between pregnant women and wastewater. CONCLUSION: Cross-sectoral ESBL-Ec in Douala exhibits high genomic diversity and alarming resistance. The occurrence of last-resort genes requires immediate One Health surveillance and coordinated interventions.
PUBMED_42678601	PubMed	2026	Genomic insights into an optrA-carrying plasmid associated with linezolid resistance in clinical Enterococcus faecalis isolates, Argentina. The spread of the transferable optrA gene poses an increasing threat to the clinical efficacy of oxazolidinones. Here, we characterized a novel optrA-carrying plasmid, pEfa-optrA-Arg, from a linezolid-resistant Enterococcus faecalis clinical isolate from Argentina. The 68,653-bp conjugative plasmid harbored optrA together with multiple antimicrobial resistance genes and showed high similarity to a plasmid previously identified in a bovine isolate from Switzerland. pEfa-optrA-Arg, or a closely related variant, was also detected in E. faecalis isolates from several Argentinian hospitals, highlighting the role of horizontal gene transfer in the spread of antimicrobial resistance across human and animal reservoirs within the One Health continuum.
PUBMED_42762686	PubMed	2026	Genomic landscape of Escherichia coli from swine to identify antibiotic resistance, pathogenicity, and dissemination potential: Implications for environmental and public health. BACKGROUND: The emergence of antimicrobial-resistant Escherichia coli in livestock, particularly swine, represents a growing concern for animal, environmental, and public health. Unorganized swine production systems may act as reservoirs for multidrug-resistant strains with zoonotic potential. METHODS: This study analyzed E. coli isolates recovered from swine in Karnataka, India using antimicrobial susceptibility testing and PCR screening for ESBL/AmpC genes (blaCTX-M, blaTEM, blaSHV, blaAmpC). Ten positive isolates were subjected to whole-genome sequencing (WGS) using the Illumina MiSeq platform and bioinformatic analyses included the identification of antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs), virulence factors (VFs), mobile genetic elements (MGEs), plasmid replicons, and biofilm-associated genes. Molecular typing (MLST, serotyping, CH typing, Clermont phylogrouping) and comparative phylogenomic analysis were performed with 53 global swine-origin E. coli genomes. RESULTS: Multiplex PCR confirmed 25/29 isolates as E. coli and PCR identified ESBL and/or AmpC genes in 10 E. coli isolates (three - single ESBL genes, four- multiple ESBL genes, one -ESBL+ AmpC co-occurrence and two carrying only AmpC). WGS revealed 48 unique ARGs, with blaTEM-1B and sul1 being most prevalent, ESBL (blaCTX-M) and AmpC (blaCMY) genes were identified in two and three isolates, respectively. The integron-integrase genes (intI1/intI2) associated with dfrA17 in two isolates suggests involvement of MGEs in resistance gene carriage and virulome analysis identified 34 conserved virulence genes. High genetic diversity with nine sequence types, multiple phylogroups (A, B1, C, F, G), seven serotype combinations, and CH typing revealed alleles such as fimH58 and fumC4. High Simpson's diversity indices (0.978 for MLST; 0.952 for serotypes) confirmed this heterogeneity. Comparative phylogenomics indicated clustering of Indian isolates (e.g., ST624, ST117) with global lineages. CONCLUSION: The co-occurrence of diverse resistance determinants, VFs, and MGEs in swine E. coli highlights their genomic diversity. These findings underscore the need for integrated genomic surveillance and antimicrobial stewardship within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42740360	PubMed	2026	Geographical Distribution of Tick Species and Tick-Borne Pathogens in Italy (2000-2022): A Systematic Review. BACKGROUND: Italy hosts a wide diversity of tick species and tick-borne pathogens (TBPs), with documented expansions in their distribution driven by environmental, ecological, and climatic changes. Although numerous studies have investigated their presence, available data remain fragmented and heterogeneous, limiting a comprehensive national overview. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This systematic review searched for studies published between January 2000 and December 2022 reporting the presence, prevalence, or geographical distribution of ticks and/or TBPs in Italy. A two-level screening process was conducted by 24 reviewers working in pairs, with conflicts resolved by a third reviewer. Eligible studies included primary field investigations on wild or domestic animals, humans, or the environment, with morphological or molecular identification of tick species and laboratory-confirmed detection of TBPs. Data were extracted into a structured database, analyzed using R software, and synthesized descriptively with spatial mapping of tick and pathogen distribution. RESULTS: Of 12,017 records identified, 356 studies met the inclusion criteria, reporting 43 tick species, with Ixodes ricinus, Rhipicephalus sanguineus s.l., Hyalomma marginatum, and Dermacentor marginatus being the most widely distributed. The most frequently reported pathogens were Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Rickettsia spp., and Borrelia burgdorferi s.l. Substantial heterogeneity in study design and geographic coverage limited quantitative comparisons, although the dataset covered 78.5% of Italian provinces. This review provides a comprehensive overview of ticks and TBPs in Italy and identifies priority areas for future surveillance and research within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42676529	PubMed	2026	Geographical clustering of delayed motherhood in India: an application of multilevel and geospatial analyses. BACKGROUND: Rapid sociodemographic changes in India, including rising female education, workforce participation, urbanization, and changing gender norms, have contributed to delayed childbearing. Despite declining fertility, limited evidence exists on the district-level geographic variations and determinants of delayed motherhood (childbirth at age 35) in India. This study applies multilevel and geospatial analyses to examine the distribution, determinants, and district-level spatial clustering of delayed motherhood using National Family Health Survey data. METHODS: This study employed multilevel multivariable logistic regression to examine individual- and district-level determinants of delayed motherhood. Spatial clustering was assessed using Global Moran's I and Local Indicators of Spatial Association (LISA). To account for spatial dependence across districts, a comparative spatial modeling framework was applied using ordinary least squares regression as the baseline model, followed by the spatial lag model and the spatial error model. RESULTS: The prevalence of delayed motherhood varied widely, ranging from negligible levels in some districts to as high as 60.18% in South West Khasi Hills, with a national average of 8.7% 95% confidence interval (CI): 8.1-9.3 . Higher education adjusted odds ratio (AOR): 2.00; 95% CI: 1.80-2.23 and age at marriage 21 years (AOR: 5.13; 95% CI: 4.65-5.67) were significant predictors. Additional factors such as higher parity, religious affiliation, and socioeconomic status also showed significant associations. A spatial analysis revealed strong clustering (Moran's I 0.459), with high-high clusters in southern and northeastern regions and low-low clusters in central and northern India. Spatial models confirmed significant spillover effects across neighboring districts. CONCLUSION: Delayed motherhood in India exhibits substantial sociodemographic and spatial heterogeneity. Key determinants include education, marriage timing, and parity patterns. The presence of distinct geographic clusters highlights the importance of regional context. These findings underscore the need for region-specific and demographically targeted policy interventions, along with further research into behavioral and health system factors influencing delayed childbearing.
PUBMED_42741221	PubMed	2026	Geopolitical risks and the spillover of food market risks: case analysis of the Chinese grain market. Maintaining the stability of food prices is crucial for achieving sustainable development in grain markets, particularly in the context of evolving international conditions and geopolitical risks. This study employs the DCC-GARCH model to examine the dynamic relationship between international and domestic grain prices, focusing on the price stability of major staple crops: soybeans, wheat, and corn. By applying generalized forecast error variance decomposition, we quantify the risk spillover effects within grain markets and clarify the role of geopolitical uncertainties in shaping such spillovers. The results reveal a pronounced time-varying pattern in the transmission of international grain prices to domestic prices, with discernible differences across crop types. Within-market risk spillovers significantly outweigh cross-market spillovers, identifying the international grain market as the primary conduit for risk transmission. Geopolitical uncertainty exerts short-term negative shocks on grain market risk spillovers and on the net spillovers of both international and domestic soybeans. Simultaneously, an increase is observed in the net spillover levels of both domestic and international wheat markets. The magnitude of geopolitical risk impacts on grain markets varies across distinct periods, with the Russia-Ukraine conflict exerting a temporary negative influence. Taking the 2022 Russia-Ukraine conflict and the Sino-US trade friction as typical cases, it further verified that geopolitical risks pose a substantive threat to China's food import security through two channels: directly impacting import sources and indirectly increasing production costs. Amid international trade uncertainties and geopolitical pressures, adopting innovative measures to bolster food security and improve nutrition is essential for advancing Sustainable Development Goal 2 (Zero Hunger). These findings offer significant implications for enhancing the stability of supply chains and market prices for key grains, particularly for agricultural importing countries.
PUBMED_42734805	PubMed	2027	Global Genomic Surveillance. Global genomic surveillance has emerged as a foundational pillar of public health in the twenty-first century, enabling real-time tracking of pathogen evolution and informing outbreak response. This chapter examines the strategic architecture of global genomic surveillance, focusing on its application to arboviruses such as chikungunya virus (CHIKV). It explores the integration of genomic data with epidemiological, clinical, and environmental information within a One Health framework, while addressing critical challenges in governance, equity, and interoperability. The discussion covers the entire genomic surveillance workflow, from sample collection and sequencing to bioinformatic analysis and phylogenetic inference, and highlights the transformative role of artificial intelligence (AI) in predictive surveillance. By analyzing global initiatives, operational barriers, and emerging technologies, this chapter underscores the necessity of sustainable, equitable, and interoperable genomic systems to proactively address current and future infectious disease threats.
PUBMED_42756860	PubMed	2026	Global intI1 abundance quantifies livestock antimicrobial-resistance risk. Livestock farming environments are major reservoirs of antimicrobial resistance (AMR), yet scalable genetic indicators that quantitatively capture AMR risk remain limited. The class 1 integrase gene intl1 is a hallmark of class 1 integrons (CL1s), which couple gene capture with horizontal transfer capacity and have emerged as leading candidates. However, their suitability as a direct proxy for livestock-associated AMR risk has not been rigorously tested at scale. Here we show that the abundance of intI1 functions as a robust quantitative indicator of livestock-associated AMR risk. Using a custom Class 1 Integrase Database expanded by 63.5% and integrating 4017 livestock metagenomes, 9625 livestock-derived isolate genomes, and approximately 1.2 million human clinical isolate genomes, we demonstrate that intI1 abundance tracks host- and geography-dependent risk patterns, that livestock CL1s carry compact, conserved resistance-cassette arrays matching clinical spectra, and that nearly all are plasmid-borne, with their efficient dissemination facilitated by Tn402, ISCR, and IS110 family elements. A random-forest model trained on these data predicts global intI1 abundance and associated risk with high accuracy (R 2 0.93), revealing persistent hotspots across Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, and South America over two decades. These findings establish intI1 as a practical, single-platform proxy that can be incorporated into One Health surveillance and early-warning systems.
PUBMED_42680011	PubMed	2026	Global lessons from antibiotic resistance: Metformin-hydrolysing genes in transposable elements, a new threat for type II diabetic patients? OBJECTIVES: To investigate the evolutionary origin, genomic mobility, and potential dissemination of metformin-hydrolysing genes (mfmAB), and to assess whether environmental selection by metformin pollution may drive the emergence of transferable pharmaceutical-degrading traits analogous to antibiotic resistance. METHODS: Large-scale comparative genomics was performed using publicly available bacterial genomes carrying mfmAB homologs. Phylogenomic reconstruction, average nucleotide identity analysis, genomic context comparison, plasmid characterization, and insertion sequence mapping were used to infer evolutionary history and identify mechanisms of horizontal gene transfer. RESULTS: mfmAB homologs were identified in twelve Aminobacter and three Pseudomonas genomes within a conserved 8.2 kb gene cluster. Phylogenomic analyses showed that metformin-degrading capacity emerged independently in multiple Aminobacter lineages across distinct continents, consistent with convergent evolution under anthropogenic selective pressure. Genomic comparisons indicated a chromosomal origin of mfmAB, followed by mobilization onto conjugative plasmids through IS1182-mediated transposition. In Pseudomonas, additional IS3/IS6-mediated transposition events integrated mfmAB into diverse plasmid backbones, frequently within composite transposons also encoding guanylurea and biguanide degradation pathways (guuH, bguH). These findings reveal a dynamic modular assembly of metabolic functions facilitating adaptation to pharmaceutical pollutants. CONCLUSIONS: Metformin pollution appears to promote the emergence and mobilization of pharmaceutical-degrading genes through mechanisms paralleling antibiotic resistance evolution. Although no clinical impact has yet been demonstrated, the potential spread of such genes into human-associated microbiomes and their possible co-selection with antibiotic resistance determinants represent an emerging One Health concern. Environmental surveillance of pharmaceutical-degrading genes is warranted to anticipate future threats to drug efficacy.
PUBMED_42755649	PubMed	2026	Governing One Health under climate pressure: policy implementation in Botswana. BACKGROUND: Climate change is tightening the links between human, animal, and environmental health, especially in settings where systems are already stretched. One Health is now widely recognised in policy circles, but in many cases, it remains more of an intention than something that is consistently practised. METHODS: This paper draws on a qualitative policy analysis of academic literature, national policy documents, and selected comparative examples from Kenya, Bangladesh, and Germany. The aim was not to be exhaustive, but to focus on how implementation unfolds, paying attention to coordination, surveillance, financing, and institutional arrangements. RESULTS: The main barriers are less related to technical knowledge and more to organisation of systems. Responsibilities are still fragmented, data systems do not easily connect, and financing of joint work is limited. At the same time, there are signs of movement. Efforts around interministerial coordination, integrated surveillance, and regional collaboration suggest that implementation is possible, but uneven and still taking shape. CONCLUSION: The findings point to a clear message. Making One Health work in practice depends on how governance is designed and sustained. At its heart, it is about clearer roles, better use of available resources and more consistent ways of working across sectors. In Botswana, where climate and health pressures are coming together, the real challenge is not new frameworks but getting existing commitments to work in practice.
PUBMED_42746073	PubMed	2026	Grand challenge: building a digitally enabled one health future for pediatric infectious diseases.
PUBMED_42679799	PubMed	2026	H5N1 Clade 2.3.4.4b Infections in Domestic Cats During an Avian Influenza Outbreak in Italy: Implications for One Health Surveillance. BACKGROUND: H5Nx goose/Guangdong (Gs/GD) lineage highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses pose a significant public health threat due to their global spread, mutation accumulation, and expanding host range. The descendant clade 2.3.4.4b has been causing widespread infections in birds and increasing spillover events in mammals. METHODS: This report documents the first fatal case of highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b infection in a domestic cat in Italy, detected in early January 2025. The cat (CAT 1) resided on a backyard poultry farm experiencing a high pathogenicity avian influenza outbreak and succumbed rapidly following the onset of respiratory signs. A second exposed cat (CAT 2) developed clinical disease without fatal outcome. Comprehensive outbreak investigations were conducted, including pathological, serological, molecular analyses, and genomic characterization. RESULTS: Pathological examination of CAT 1 revealed acute necrotizing bronchointerstitial pneumonia, non-suppurative meningoencephalitis, and disseminated foci of hepatic necrosis. Interestingly, the PB2-E627K mutation associated with mammalian virus adaptation was observed in the feline viral isolate compared to avian isolates. Such polymerase complex mutations are key determinants of host range and increase pathogenicity in mammals. CAT 2 from the same farm tested negative for AIV genome detection but subsequently seroconverted for antibodies against NPA, H5, and N1. CONCLUSION: Sharing these findings is crucial for surveillance aimed at enabling early identification of increased risks to human and animal health, preventing cross-species viral transmission and mitigating the risk of potential spillover events.
PUBMED_42756862	PubMed	2026	HEARTS best practices in the Dominican RepublicBoas pr ticas da iniciativa HEARTS na Rep blica Dominicana . The HEARTS initiative in the Americas is a key strategy for strengthening primary health care and improving the management of high blood pressure, the leading risk factor for cardiovascular disease. In the Dominican Republic, its implementation has evolved toward an institutionalized model focused on quality, governance, and access to medications.The objective of this paper is to describe the implementation and main outcomes of HEARTS in the country as of 2025. A descriptive study was conducted based on secondary data from the national systems used to monitor the HEARTS initiative, including administrative records, national reports, the District Health Information System (DHIS2), SCORECARD, the maturity and performance index, and the HEARTS HEATMAP, covering the period 2019-2025.The strategy achieved an implementation coverage of 87.7% among primary care centers (1214 of 1384), with more than 315 000 individuals being followed up. Blood pressure control among patients treated according to HEARTS protocols exceeded 80%, while clinical follow-up and timely initiation of treatment reached 100%. Overall, 77.8% of primary care centers were classified at the intermediate levels of maturity, and the system achieved a score of 2.5/4 on the HEARTS HEATMAP.These results demonstrate progress in institutionalizing the strategy and strengthening primary care, although gaps in population coverage and community-based follow-up persist.
PUBMED_42681502	PubMed	2026	Hamster Model of Leptospira Infection. Leptospirosis is a globally important zoonotic disease with a high mortality rate in severe cases. The Syrian hamster (Mesocricetus auratus) is highly susceptible to Leptospira and is commonly used as a lethal acute model that mimics human leptospirosis. This chapter describes procedures for establishing various infection models, including the intraperitoneal, subcutaneous, transdermal, oral, and respiratory routes. Additionally, it provides detailed methods for collecting samples and evaluating the pathology of infected hamsters.
PUBMED_42671285	PubMed	2026	Hantavirus infections in Southeastern Europe - Epidemiology, outbreak dynamics, and One Health preparedness: A narrative review. Human-pathogenic orthohantaviruses are significant rodent-borne zoonotic pathogens in Europe. Southeastern Europe (SEE) is a distinct endemic region where Dobrava-Belgrade virus (DOBV) and Puumala virus (PUUV) co-circulate, causing hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) of varying severity. This narrative review synthesizes the epidemiology, transmission dynamics, clinical characteristics, ecological drivers, and public health challenges of hantavirus infections across SEE, identifying priorities for regional preparedness. We searched PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science from their inception through June 2026, supplementing with reference screening. Regional epidemiological patterns were assessed descriptively using national surveillance data, European surveillance reports, published studies, and available population-based incidence estimates. Long-term surveillance reveals persistent endemic transmission with significant geographic and interannual heterogeneity. Slovenia and Croatia exhibit the highest cumulative burden and most pronounced periods of increased HFRS activity. Several years-2008, 2012, 2014, 2017, 2019, 2021, and 2023-showed partially synchronized increases across multiple neighboring countries. These patterns align with shared ecological influences, including rodent population fluctuations, mast-seeding events, and climatic variability. However, local ecology, human exposure, and differences in surveillance capacity modify their magnitude. The coexistence of generally milder PUUV-associated disease and more severe DOBV-associated HFRS further distinguishes SEE's clinical landscape. Therefore, hantavirus epidemiology in SEE is best understood as an interconnected regional ecological system. Integrated human, animal, environmental, and genomic surveillance within a coordinated One Health framework is crucial for improving outbreak prediction, cross-border preparedness, and future disease control.
PUBMED_42773773	PubMed	2026	Hantavirus preparedness at human-rodent interfaces: lessons from China's HFRS control and Andes virus transmission in mobile populations. Hantaviruses are globally distributed reservoir-associated viruses that cause haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS), mainly in Eurasia, and hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome (HCPS; also termed hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, HPS), mainly in the Americas. Most human infections arise from exposure to rodent-contaminated environments, so clustered disease may reflect shared environmental exposure rather than interpersonal transmission. This Review uses China's long-term HFRS experience as a central case study for interface-centred preparedness. China demonstrates that sustained surveillance, reservoir monitoring, risk-defined vaccination, rodent control and environmental risk reduction can substantially reduce disease burden, but declining incidence does not mean disappearance of ecological risk. Its dual HTNV and SEOV ecology further shows that one clinical syndrome can arise from distinct agricultural and peri-domestic rat-associated interfaces. Andes virus (ANDV) provides a contrasting challenge: selected outbreaks have documented limited but consequential human-to-human transmission after close or prolonged contact. The 2026 MV Hondius event illustrates how such transmission can become an international contact-tracing problem when it occurs in mobile populations. Preparedness should therefore combine long-term management of rodent-derived interfaces, rapid discrimination between common-source clusters and ANDV secondary transmission, and response systems that remain effective when exposed persons, infected animals or close contacts cross geographical borders.
PUBMED_42738577	PubMed	2026	Harnessing Phytobiotics for Gut Protection: A Comprehensive Review on the Role of Cangzhu (Atractylodes lancea) in Sustainable Animal Husbandry. The global transition to antibiotic-free livestock production, accelerated by antimicrobial-resistance concerns, has intensified the search for alternatives to antibiotic growth promoters, and phytobiotics have emerged as key candidates. Cangzhu, the dried rhizome of Atractylodes lancea (Thunb.) DC, is a crude drug of traditional Chinese medicine that has attracted substantial attention as a multipurpose phytobiotic. This review synthesizes current knowledge on the phytochemistry, gut-protective mechanisms, and practical application of Cangzhu in sustainable livestock production. Its principal bioactive constituents are sesquiterpenoids (atractylone, -eudesmol, hinesol, atractylenolides I-III), polyacetylenes (including atractylodin), polysaccharides, and flavonoids. Reported gut-protective mechanisms comprise upregulation of tight junction proteins (ZO-1, occludin, claudin-1); dual suppression of the NF- B and MAPK-signaling pathways; activation of the Nrf2-Keap1 antioxidant axis; modulation of the gut microbiota; and TLR4-mediated stimulation of mucosal immunity. In swine, poultry, and ruminant studies, Atractylodes-based supplementation has been associated with improved growth performance, a lower incidence of diarrhea, favorable intestinal morphology, downregulated pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF- , IL-1 , IL-6), beneficial microbiota shifts, and inhibited pathogens. However, much of the mechanistic evidence derives from rodent and in vitro models, and much of the in vivo livestock evidence from the related species A. macrocephala (Baizhu) or multi-herb formulations; direct livestock trials with pure A. lancea remain limited for several endpoints, and the responses observed in these heterogeneous studies depend on the formulation, dose, and animal species used, as indicated by the explicit evidence-tier and source-species tags applied throughout the text, tables, and figures. The reported effective inclusion levels should be read as experimental study ranges and not as standardized dose recommendations. Framed within the One Health paradigm, Cangzhu is therefore best characterized as a mechanistically substantiated candidate alternative to antibiotic growth promoters whose adoption requires species-specific dose validation, quality standardization, and commercial-scale economic confirmation.
PUBMED_42689109	PubMed	2026	Hendra virus: research progress on a bat-borne threat lurking at the human-animal interface. Hendra virus (HeV) is a highly lethal zoonotic henipavirus that has caused recurrent cross-species spillover events in Australia since 1994. Its capacity for cross-species spillover, together with its tropism for vascular endothelial and neural tissues, makes HeV important to veterinary medicine and public health. Flying foxes are the natural reservoir hosts, and horses act as intermediate and amplifying hosts through which all confirmed human infections have occurred. Detection of antibodies and viral RNA from related henipaviruses in Southeast Asian bats indicates regional henipavirus diversity and a possible broader henipavirus spillover risk, but does not demonstrate HeV circulation or transmission in Southeast Asia. Human HeV infection is rare but can cause severe respiratory and neurological disease. From a veterinary-oriented One Health perspective, this review integrates current evidence on viral biology, transmission, clinical disease, diagnostics, animal models, equine vaccination, and clinical-stage vaccines and antibody-based interventions, with particular attention to HeV-g2-associated diagnostic challenges and the role of equine vaccination in reducing occupational exposure.
PUBMED_42738585	PubMed	2026	High Seropositivity to Coxiella burnetii Among Goats Sampled in Southwestern Jeonnam Province, South Korea: A Pilot Study. Coxiella burnetii is the causative agent of Q fever, a zoonotic disease of public health concern. Despite the recent expansion of the domestic goat industry in Korea, epidemiological data regarding C. burnetii exposure in Korean goat populations remain limited. This pilot study aimed to assess the serological distribution of C. burnetii exposure in the southwestern region of Jeonnam Province, the major goat-breeding region of Korea. Goat serum samples were originally collected for routine Foot-and-Mouth Disease monitoring in 2025. Using a two-stage random sampling approach, 92 samples were selected from 16 farms across five southwestern counties of Jeonnam Province. Specific antibodies against C. burnetii were detected using a commercial ELISA. The overall unadjusted apparent seropositivity was 44.6% (41/92). By county, seropositivity was 61.1% in both Haenam and Wando, 38.9% in Gangjin, 36.8% in Yeongam, and 26.3% in Jangheung. Furthermore, the overall herd-level apparent seropositivity was 68.8% (11/16). At the herd level within the surveyed farms, intra-herd seropositivity ranged from 0.0% to 100.0%, showing wide variation among the tested farms. The results indicate high serological exposure to C. burnetii within the surveyed southwestern counties. While constrained by a small sample size, these findings show that targeted longitudinal surveillance is required in this region. Expanding systematic monitoring efforts nationwide is recommended to establish effective veterinary and public health control measures.
PUBMED_42774196	PubMed	2026	High fidelity wastewater surveillance as an early warning tool for diphtheria in the German Ruhr metropolitan area. INTRODUCTION: Diphtheria is re-emerging as a public health concern in Europe, with recent fatalities underlining the need for strengthened surveillance. In highly vaccinated populations, limited clinical suspicion and reduced routine testing can obscure low-level circulation of toxigenic strains, increasing the risk of silent spread. In addition to classical Corynebacterium diphtheriae infections, the potential mobilization of the diphtheria toxin (tox) gene within and possibly beyond different Corynebacterium species represents a growing threat. METHODS: We developed a high-fidelity wastewater-based surveillance approach capable of detecting tox genes as an early warning system to complement clinical and laboratory-based monitoring. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: During routine metagenomic surveillance, including weekly monitoring of the local wastewater treatment plant, screening with a tox-specific Hidden Markov Model (HMM) detected tox signals in 18 of 160 environmental samples. Technical and sample-availability constraints allowed PCR confirmation of 15 HMM-positive samples, and 14 of these PCR products were confirmed by amplicon sequencing. One detection coincided spatially and temporally with a tox-positive Corynebacterium clinical case: wastewater from the hospital ward and downstream treatment plant was positive that week and negative the following week. No corresponding clinical isolates were identified for the other wastewater signals. Although not conclusive, this concordance supports alerting clinicians and public-health authorities when tox is detected in wastewater.
PUBMED_42735583	PubMed	2026	High prevalence of Rickettsia felis in fleas from pets in central Argentina. In recent decades, there has been a significant increase in the emergence of infectious diseases, many of which are transmitted by ectoparasites such as fleas and ticks. In the Southern Hemisphere, transmission by these vectors is primarily associated with bacteria of the genus Rickettsia. Although the presence of Rickettsia spp. in Argentina has been previously reported, this study investigates the presence and identity of these pathogens in fleas and ticks collected from pets (Felis catus and Canis lupus familiaris) in the central region of Argentina. A total of 144 ectoparasite pools were analyzed, including 59 flea pools and 85 tick pools. Only Ctenocephalides felis felis and Rhipicephalus sanguineus sensu lato were identified. All tick pools tested negative for Rickettsia spp. However, 35.6% of C. f. felis pools (21/59) tested positive for Rickettsia sp. and sequence analysis of the ompA and ompB genes identified Rickettsia felis. Of these 21 positive pools, 10 were from dogs and 11 from cats. The minimum infection rate was 13.2%. Sequence analysis of PCR products showed 100% identity with R. felis sequences published in GenBank. Phylogenetic analysis of the ompB gene confirmed 100% identity with known R. felis sequences. Our findings confirm the presence of R. felis in fleas from pets in central Argentina. Despite the absence of reported human cases, enhanced surveillance is essential to assess the public health risk and understand the transmission dynamics of this pathogen in urban and peri-urban environments. These findings contribute to expanding the known geographic distribution of bacteria of the genus Rickettsia and support the role of C. f. felis as a potential vector and reservoir of this pathogen.
PUBMED_42691526	PubMed	2026	High within-herd prevalence and assessment of production impacts of Coxiella burnetii in postpartum cattle from a Scottish dairy herd. Coxiella burnetii is endemic in Great Britain dairy herds but detailed investigations of C. burnetii epidemiology and impacts on livestock production in this region are scarce. The objectives of this cross-sectional study were to first determine the within-herd prevalence of C. burnetii on a commercial Scottish dairy farm with prior detection of C. burnetii and second assess the relationship between pathogen load and individual health and performance traits. Vaginal swabs were collected from cows up to seven days postpartum. DNA extracts were tested for C. burnetii by IS1111 qPCR assay. Generalized linear models were used to estimate the relationships between bacterial load and health and performance traits. A total of 313 swabs were collected between 15 December 2022 and 06 July 2023, of which 301 (96.1%) had detectable C. burnetii DNA with Ct 40. The Ct values observed (12.9-38.7) corresponded to estimated genome equivalents per reaction of 1 to 2.5 million genomes. Higher bacterial loads were seen in primiparous compared to multiparous cows. Higher bacterial loads were also more likely in cows that had experienced one or more negative reproductive outcomes, including abortion, premature delivery, prolonged gestation, stillbirth and dystocia. The direction of causation underlying the observed associations and representativeness of findings from this single herd require further investigation. This study provides insights into the within-herd dynamics of C. burnetii and evidence generated through sampling and diagnostic testing approaches that can inform future work to characterize the epidemiology and impacts of this infection in Great Britain dairy cattle and globally.
PUBMED_42787473	PubMed	2026	Highly pathogenic avian influenza A (H5N1) in a backyard flock in Serbia: implications of low biosecurity. In autumn 2024, a highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 virus outbreak occurred in a mixed-species backyard poultry flock in central Serbia, comprising hens, ducks, and geese. After the sudden death of two hens, a thorough diagnostic investigation was initiated. Gross examination of the affected hens revealed lesions typical of HPAIV infection, including severe cyanosis of the comb and head skin, and diffuse hemorrhagic lesions of internal organs. On-site investigation included assessment of the remaining birds, environmental sampling, and a biosecurity survey specific to backyard flocks. Although asymptomatic, ducks and geese (n 23) tested positive for avian influenza by both oropharyngeal and cloacal swabs, as well as by serological testing. The biosecurity assessment highlighted major deficiencies, including uncontrolled access to a nearby canal frequented by wild waterfowl. Overall, virus introduction at the domestic-wild bird interface was considered the most epidemiologically plausible hypothesis. However, this pathway could not be confirmed because wild birds were not sampled and viral genome sequencing was not performed.
PUBMED_42752218	PubMed	2026	Host- and pathogen-regulated exocytosis facilitates dynamic distribution of endolysosomal content during infection by the vacuolar pathogen Coxiella burnetii. Coxiella burnetii is an obligate intracellular bacterial pathogen that causes the zoonotic disease Q fever. Coxiella extensively subverts host vesicle traffic and replicates within lysosome-derived, spacious vacuoles by secreting a suite of effectors through the type IVB secretion system (T4BSS). This study investigates the regulation and role of a fundamental lysosomal process, exocytosis, in the prolonged maintenance of Coxiella vacuolar niche. Biochemical, microscopic, and proteomic approaches indicate that infection promotes release of extracellular vesicles (EVs). Increase in extracellular levels of endolysosomal proteins and surface localization of LAMP1 were identified in both phagocytic and non-phagocytic cells, during later stages of infection. Interestingly, infection-induced exocytosis was dependent on the activity of the bacterial T4BSS. On one hand, knockdown of the lysosomal master transcriptional regulator TFEB significantly reduces basal exocytosis and enhances intracellular Coxiella replication, while deficiency of the exocytosis-associated SNARE, Syntaxin 11, does not reduce basal exocytosis and yet, increases Coxiella replication, suggesting that host exocytosis is not the sole or a dominant determinant of the infection process. On the other hand, modulating the activity of a key host exocytosis regulator- the calcium channel TRPML1, decreases intracellular Coxiella replication suggesting a tightly regulated role of TRPML1. Infection was also associated with the extracellular detection of LAMP1-associated Coxiella, suggesting an encased egress mechanism. Together, this study demonstrates that Coxiella infection activates exocytosis in a temporal, host-, and bacterial factor-dependent manner.
PUBMED_42702276	PubMed	2026	Human Seroprevalence of Echinococcus granulosus in Sulaimani City. In endemic countries such as Iraq, Echinococcus granulosus (E. granulosus) causes cystic echinococcosis (CE), which is an important zoonotic disease, for which information on epidemiology is needed for adequate monitoring and implementation of prevention programs. A cross-sectional study was performed to assess the seroprevalence of human CE, risk factors associated with it, and abdominal ultrasonographic findings in the residents of Sulaimani City in northern Iraq. A total of 454 participants were recruited, and serum samples were tested for anti-E. granulosus IgG antibodies using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Structured questionnaires were used to collect sociodemographic data and possible exposure factors, and to find independent determinants of seropositivity; binary logistic regression was used. Seropositive participants were invited to undergo an abdominal ultrasound (US). Overall, seroprevalence was 13.4% (61/454). Most demographic, occupational, lifestyle, and exposure-related variables had no significant relationship with seropositivity. However, a family history of hydatid illness was found to be independently linked with infection (OR 2.75, 95% CI: 1.02-7.38; p 0.045). Six (27.3%) of the 22 seropositive participants who underwent US had abdominal hydatid cysts. The liver was the most often affected organ (50.0%), followed by the kidney (33.3%). Older age, female sex, and past hydatid illness were significant factors associated with cyst detection. The results of this study indicate that CE is a public health problem in Sulaimani City. Household clustering indicates shared environmental exposure, whereas weak correlation with traditional risk variables indicates high environmental exposure. Enhancing One Health initiatives and combining serological screening with imaging have the potential to improve early detection and reduce transmission in endemic areas.
PUBMED_42787985	PubMed	2026	Human depopulation reshapes antimicrobial resistance dynamics in wildlife through ecological and transmission processes. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in wildlife is often interpreted as a spillover consequence of anthropogenic contamination, but the effects of long-term human depopulation remain poorly understood. We investigated quinolone-resistant Escherichia coli (QRE) and third-generation cephalosporin-resistant E. coli (3CRE) in wildlife and environmental samples from the Difficult-to-Return zones (DRZ), where human activity has been restricted since the 2011 Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant accident, and from areas outside the DRZ (OUTSIDE), where human activity is present. Samples were collected from wild boar (n 326), raccoons (n 177), masked palm civets (n 51), other wildlife (n 39), wallows (n 5), rivers (n 9), and ponds (n 9). Generalized additive models (GAMs) evaluated QRE occurrence using camera-trap-derived wildlife density, land-use variables, and livestock indices; core genome single-nucleotide polymorphism (cgSNP) analysis assessed genomic relatedness and transmission. QRE detection in wild boar was significantly higher in the DRZ, and cgSNP analysis indicated extensive clonal sharing among DRZ wild boar. GAM analysis further showed that QRE carriage increased with local wild boar density, supporting density-associated clonal expansion. In raccoons and masked palm civets, QRE carriage was associated with agricultural land, suggesting an influence of human-modified landscapes. Additionally, bla CTX-M-15 was disseminated across host species via a conserved mobile genetic element, suggesting horizontal gene transfer alongside clonal spread. These findings show that long-term human depopulation can reshape wildlife AMR dynamics and highlight the importance of integrating wildlife population management into One Health-based AMR risk assessments for human reinhabitation.
PUBMED_42765226	PubMed	2026	Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Synergistic Pollution and Carbon Reduction . With the rise of next-generation information technologies artificial intelligence AI has demonstrated substantial potential in enhancing environmental governance and promoting green development. Using panel data from 267 prefecture-level cities in China spanning from 2014 to 2023 this study applies a variety of econometric models including the two-way fixed effects model and spatial Durbin model to explore the impact of AI on synergistic pollution and carbon reduction and its underlying mechanisms. The results indicate that AI significantly promoted synergistic pollution and carbon reduction with its impact exhibiting dynamic changes. Industrial structure upgrading green technological innovation and resource misallocation alleviation were key pathways through which AI drove synergistic pollution and carbon reduction. The effect of AI on synergistic pollution and carbon reduction showed dual-threshold characteristics due to variations in digital infrastructure development. The influence of AI on synergistic pollution and carbon reduction exhibited pronounced spatial spillover effects which could foster regional synergistic pollution and carbon reduction through technological diffusion. This study not only uncovers the mechanisms through which AI influences synergistic pollution and carbon reduction but also provides empirical evidence for the construction of a cross-regional green collaborative governance system.
PUBMED_42761805	PubMed	2026	Impact of Coxiella burnetii-associated abortions in Finnish forest reindeer within a zoo on public health appeared negligible succeeding mitigation strategies. Coxiella burnetii is a Gram-negative, ubiquitous bacterium that may infect many animal species as well as humans. In this study, transmission of C. burnetii during an outbreak of abortions in a herd of Finnish forest reindeer (Rangifer tarandus fennicus) in a Dutch zoo was investigated. Diagnostic sampling showed positive C. burnetii antigen detection with qPCR from vaginal swabs and positive C. burnetii serology (ELISA) in all cases of abortion (4/4) and in one animal after normal parturition. Placental tissue (n 2) and fetal liver tissue (n 1) retrieved after two abortions were positive for C. burnetii infection by qPCR and immunohistochemistry. Histological staining revealed the presence of C. burnetii in the placenta, indicating infection. Follow-up diagnostic approaches were aimed toward isolation, strain typing, and molecular analysis. Direct sequencing from placental tissue resulted in a full genome and plasmid sequence. Whole-genome sequence analysis, including multilocus variable-number tandem repeat analysis (MLVA), resulted in similarities with a C. burnetii strain previously found in cattle. A One Health approach was implemented, guiding efforts to prevent and monitor human Q fever following potential exposure to C. burnetii. No human Q fever cases were reported, and additional serological testing of exposed zoo personnel showed no indications of infection. This article describes the first documented case of clinical abortions caused by C. burnetii in Finnish forest reindeer, offering new insights into coxiellosis in non-domestic animals and highlighting lessons to inform future preparedness and response.
PUBMED_42760915	PubMed	2026	Implementation of 7-1-7 for improving timeliness in outbreak detection and response in Thailand: A mixed-methods study on challenges in application and achievement of targets in 2024-25. BACKGROUND: Infectious disease outbreaks result in unfavourable outcomes when swift actions fail. The 7-1-7 target (detect within 7 days, notify within 1 day, respond within 7 days) was proposed to improve timeliness. Thailand piloted 7-1-7 in 2024 and scaled it up nationwide in 2025. This study aimed to quantify the 7-1-7 target achievement, identify bottlenecks and enablers, and describe challenges and solutions for applying the 7-1-7 metrics. METHODS: A mixed-methods study was conducted with quantitative assessment of all events meeting the national health threat criteria during January 2024 and June 2025 for timeliness, bottlenecks and enablers for meeting the 7-1-7 target. A qualitative descriptive study with in-depth interviews of key stakeholders explored challenges and solutions for applying the 7-1-7 framework. RESULTS: Of the 1,435 events assessed, 15% were dangerous communicable diseases and 3% occurred in hotels. Among all the events, 50% achieved the 7-1-7 target; 85%, 73%, and 83% were detected, notified and responded to in a timely manner, respectively. The median (interquartile range) duration for detection, notification and response were 0 (0-5) days, 0 (0-2) days and 2 (0-5) days, respectively. Among events that occurred in hotels, none met the 7-1-7 target. Dangerous communicable diseases had the highest notification (95%) and response performance (99%), despite lower timely detection (71%). Key bottlenecks included delayed care-seeking and weak coordination. Key stakeholders felt that the 7-1-7 metrics was useful, but the lack of standardised data sources, disease-specific guidelines and centralised data extraction made implementation difficult. Proposed solutions focused on streamlining and decentralizing the application of 7-1-7. CONCLUSION: It is appreciable that Thailand was able to apply the 7-1-7 framework and half of the events met the 7-1-7 target. However, to better the application of 7-1-7, future work should focus on strengthening data integration and formulating disease specific guidelines.
PUBMED_42704604	PubMed	2026	In silico analysis of metal resistance genes in Pseudomonas extremaustralis 2E-UNGS: Genomic insights and safety assessment for wastewater biotreatment. Pseudomonas extremaustralis 2E-UNGS is a non-pathogenic strain isolated from the polluted Reconquista River basin (Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area, Argentina), with a 20-year history of study focused on its survival strategies that have enabled its application in various processes such as waste biotreatment and biosensing. Regarding bacterial-metal interactions, P. extremaustralis 2E-UNGS is capable of biosorbing Cd(II), Zn(II), and Cu(II), and biotransforming Cr(VI) to Cr(III), facilitating both the removal of these metals from aqueous systems and their use in biosensor development. The complete circular chromosome (6,372,594 bp) has been annotated in the NCBI GenBank under accession number NZ CP091043.1. The aim of this work was to perform an in-depth exploration of the P. extremaustralis 2E-UNGS genome to support the optimization of sustainable bioprocesses within the One Health framework. To this end, the integration of experimental evidence with a detailed in silico analysis of key genes involved in metal-microorganism interactions, antibiotic resistance, and their interconnections provides valuable insights for the optimization of future biotechnological applications. Considering its antibiotic resistance profile, together with the activation of efflux pumps induced by metal stimuli-particularly observed under Zn(II) exposure-P. extremaustralis 2E-UNGS can be regarded as suitable for the design of confined bioreactor processes, minimizing the risk of potential accidental environmental releases. Therefore, modulation of gene expression emerges as a promising approach to enhance the efficiency of metal-loaded wastewater biotreatments.
PUBMED_42677848	PubMed	2026	Including nonhuman lives in humanitarian responses: a One Health imperative.
PUBMED_42738428	PubMed	2026	Independent Discovery of Mesomycoplasma conjunctivae in Non-Native Aoudad (Ammotragus lervia) in Texas. Conservation of native species is an ongoing task, especially when non-native species present a threat via competition and disease transmission. In Texas, native desert bighorn sheep (DBS) compete directly with non-native aoudad for resources. Aoudad (Ammotragus lervia, also known as Barbary sheep), introduced into the United States from Africa, are competent hosts of Mesomycoplasma ovipneumoniae and are thought to be the primary reservoir for transmitting pneumonia to DBS. A recent epidemic (circa December 2025) of infectious keratoconjunctivitis (IKC) in aoudad was reported in western Texas. Herein, we compare newly derived microbial data (16S rRNA sequencing) to results derived from a previous dataset (multi-locus sequence typing). Five M. conjunctivae haplotypes were indicated by 16S sequence data obtained from 33 individuals. Phylogenetic analyses identified these haplotypes as members of a clade containing sequences from wild ungulate hosts, whereas sequences from domestic ungulates formed a divergent clade (6.58%). Together, these data indicate the presence of an aoudad-like M. conjunctivae obtained from four mountain ranges in western Texas during 2018-2020. These implications suggest that monitoring for IKC and identifying the bacterial pathogen is paramount in case of spillover from aoudad to DBS. Based on the data presented herein, effective management strategies should take a dual approach of bacterial surveillance and preparation in case of antibiotic intervention for DBS conservation.
WHO_5	WHO	2024-03-07T13:06:11Z	Influenza A (H5N1) virus - China The Ministry of Health in China has reported a new case of human infection with the H5N1 avian influenza virus. The case was confirmed by the national laboratory on 23 May. The 19-year old male soldier, serving in Fujian province, developed fever and pneumonia-like symptoms on 9 May and was hospitalized on 14 May. There is no initial indication to suggest he had contact with sick birds prior to becoming unwell. Close contacts have been placed under medical observation and all remain well. Of the 25 cases confirmed to date in China, 15 have been fatal.
PUBMED_42778230	PubMed	2026	Integrated bite case management within a One Health framework for rabies elimination at the primary care level in Kerala, India: an implementation research protocol using a stepped-wedge cluster randomised design. INTRODUCTION: Rabies remains a persistent public health threat in India, while gaps in surveillance and coordination of control measures undermine progress towards ending human rabies deaths. The WHO advocates a One Health approach, combining mass dog vaccination, postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) and Integrated Bite Case Management (IBCM). IBCM is not yet incorporated into India's national rabies action plan for rabies elimination. This study seeks to generate robust evidence on the effectiveness, cost-effectiveness, feasibility, facilitators and barriers of IBCM implemented within Kerala's Rabies Control Programme. METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This implementation research adopts a stepped-wedge cluster randomised controlled trial (RCT) design. IBCM will be implemented across six administrative blocks in Thiruvananthapuram District, Kerala, across diverse rural and urban settings and including tribal population representation. The IBCM intervention includes stakeholder training and support and active animal surveillance aligned with WHO guidance. Suspect or probable rabies exposures presenting at selected health facilities will be identified via a community-based hotline. This will trigger investigations and responses including dog vaccination and sensitisation. Prior to IBCM implementation, baseline data will be collected on management of dog bites, bite patient incidence and healthcare seeking behaviours. Hospital-based event tracking of bite cases will be conducted at enrolled public health facilities before and during IBCM implementation. The resulting RCT data will be used to model the impacts and cost-effectiveness of IBCM, including the potential for cost savings through judicious PEP if scaled across Kerala. To understand the barriers and facilitators to IBCM implementation, we will use in-depth interviews and focus group discussions with stakeholders.There is an urgent need to strengthen rabies surveillance, including coordination across health and animal health sectors and outbreak responses to accelerate rabies elimination. IBCM is expected to lead to improved PEP completion, increased detection and laboratory confirmation of rabid dogs, strengthened dog vaccination coverage and targeted outbreak responses in high-risk areas. This RCT will provide critical evidence to inform policy, support scale-up, generate insights into contextual barriers and facilitators for IBCM implementation, and guide India's One Health rabies elimination strategy. This study will evaluate a health-sector-initiated IBCM approach that identifies cases through dog-bite patients presenting to health facilities, supporting comprehensive One Health integration and improved patient care. ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study was approved by WHO Ethics Committee (2024.9.Ind), Kerala University of Health Sciences (AX04/SOP07A/V2) and the ethics committee of Government Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram (HEC No.12/06/2024/MCT); informed written consent will be obtained from all participants, analysis will be limited to de-identified data, and findings will be disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and policy-relevant platforms. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: CTRI/2024/08/073117.
PUBMED_42747590	PubMed	2026	Integrating Community Practices, Vector Resistance, and Molecular Xenomonitoring of Wuchereria Bancrofti: A One Health Implementation Study in Lymphatic Filariasis-Endemic Communities. PURPOSE: Lymphatic filariasis (LF), caused primarily by Wuchereria bancrofti and transmitted by mosquitoes, remains a public health challenge in Nigeria. Insecticides and insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) are used as control measures. However, limited public awareness and widespread insecticide resistance impede elimination. Molecular xenomonitoring is essential for detecting active transmission and determining when it is halted. This study assessed community knowledge, attitudes, and practices (KAPs) on LF, insecticide resistance, and xenomonitoring of W. bancrofti in Bodinga Local Government Area (LGA). METHODS: A semi-structured questionnaire was administered to 258 participants from three wards to assess KAPs. Anopheles and Culex larvae were collected, reared, and tested for susceptibility to deltamethrin, permethrin, and alphacypermethrin using the Centre for Disease Control (CDC) bioassay. Comparative expression of cytochrome P450 genes (CYP6M2, CYP9M10) was also evaluated. Blood-fed mosquitoes were collected with a Prokopack aspirator for microfilaria screening and molecular xenomonitoring using polymerase chain reactions (PCRs). RESULTS: Only 41.9% of respondents had heard of LF, indicating significant knowledge gaps. Anopheles and Culex were resistant to all pyrethroids (6-44% mortality). Piperonyl butoxide (PBO) restored susceptibility to alphacypermethrin (98-99%). Of 1,510 mosquitoes, 5 (0.33%) were detected as infected by microscopy; 3 (0.20%) were PCR-confirmed W. bancrofti, and the L3 larvae was detected using quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR). Real-time PCR of microscopy-negative pools showed no infections. CYP6M2 and CYP9M10 were downregulated (0.26-fold and 0.77-fold, respectively) in infected mosquitoes. CONCLUSION: The study highlights low LF knowledge, pyrethroid resistance, and possible active transmission in Bodinga LGA. Awareness campaigns, PBO-based interventions, and further resistance mechanism studies are recommended.
PUBMED_42788961	PubMed	2026	Interfacial Oxygen Spillover Between Ru Single-Atom and Ni Cluster in Efficient Water Electrolysis. The sluggish oxygen evolution reaction (OER) remains a major kinetic bottleneck limiting the efficiency of alkaline water electrolysis, largely owing to the intrinsic scaling relationship among oxygen-containing intermediates on conventional single active sites. Here, a Ru single-atom/Ni cluster interfacial catalyst supported on nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (RuSA-NiClu/NCNT) is constructed through an ultrafast pulsed-discharge strategy. Operando spectroscopic investigations combined with density functional theory calculations reveal a unique division-of-labor mechanism at the atomic-cluster interface, where Ru single atoms facilitate hydroxyl activation, while neighboring Ni clusters promote O O coupling and oxygen evolution. The interfacial electronic interaction induces charge redistribution and generates a built-in electric field, enabling directional oxygen spillover between adjacent active sites. This interfacial oxygen transfer pathway spatially decouples elementary OER steps, optimizes oxygen intermediate adsorption, and optimizes the adsorption energetics of oxygenated intermediates. Benefiting from the tailored interfacial electronic structure, RuSA-NiClu/NCNT achieves an overpotential of only 224 mV at 10 mA cm-2 with a Ru loading of 2.3 wt%. Moreover, the catalyst enables stable operation of an anion exchange membrane water electrolyzer (AEMWE) for over 500 h at 1 A cm-2. This work establishes single-atom/cluster interfaces as a promising platform for regulating catalytic division of labor toward efficient and durable water electrolysis.
PUBMED_42707514	PubMed	2026	Interinstitutional collaboration to promote public health research in Ecuador: a story of success from the National Institute of Public Health in Ecuador.
PUBMED_42765064	PubMed	2026	Joint Epidemiological Investigation Results of the Canine Brucellosis Outbreak at a Breeding Facility Associated with a Human Brucellosis Case, 2025. OBJECTIVES: Canine brucellosis, caused by Brucella canis, is a zoonosis transmitted through contact with infected dogs or infectious reproductive materials. Following a report of human B. canis infection in Paju-si, Gyeonggi-do, in April 2025, canine brucellosis was identified at a dog breeding facility operated by the patient's spouse. A joint investigation was conducted to assess potential transmission and prevent further spread. METHODS: Interviews assessed symptoms, facility visits, and dog contact; blood culture results were reviewed. Of 99 dogs at the facility, 85 aged 6 months underwent serologic and culture testing. Fifty-eight puppies distributed during the previous 6 months were traced, and 34 final owners were monitored for 24 weeks after their last exposure. RESULTS: The patient intermittently visited the facility and had contact with dogs. Her asymptomatic spouse had a negative blood culture on April 29, 2025. Of 85 dogs tested, 11 (12.9%) were positive (n 10) or suspected positive (n 1), representing at least 11.1% of all 99 dogs; B. canis was isolated from four dogs. Among 34 distributed dogs with identified final owners, all 14 tested were negative; the remaining 20 dogs, aged 6 months, had no clinical signs and untested. No owner reported symptoms suggestive of brucellosis during follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: Transmission to the patient was likely from infected dogs or infectious materials. Detection of infected dogs in all breeding units highlights the limitations in early recognition. Testing newly introduced and breeding dogs, prompt diagnosis after reproductive abnormalities, and stronger information sharing between human and animal health sectors are needed.
PUBMED_42767144	PubMed	2026	Knowing green to invent green: Dose enterprise internal green community facilitate the green innovation transformation of inventors? Facilitating inventors' green innovation transformation (IGIT) to bolster the green talent reservoir serves as a crucial pathway for enterprises to enhance their internal motivation for green transformation and attain sustainable development. Guided by social network theory, this study innovatively introduces an informal organizational structure-enterprise internal green community (EIGC)-and systematically examines its multifaceted impact on IGIT from a coopetition perspective. Focusing on the decoupling of social and knowledge networks, this study further explores how EIGC influences IGIT by reshaping inventors' knowledge search and utilization behaviors, and substantiates our arguments using a sample of 669,897 invention patents from Chinese listed companies over the period 2009-2023, which involves 9.38 million inventor collaboration pairs and 4.47 million knowledge association pairs. The empirical results show that EIGC significantly promotes IGIT, and this conclusion remains robust after a series of endogeneity treatments and robustness tests. Mechanism analysis reveals that EIGC facilitates IGIT by increasing exposure to green knowledge, mining mature green knowledge, enabling the exaptation of green knowledge, and identifying non-redundant knowledge nodes. Heterogeneity analysis finds that EIGC can partially substitute for the compensatory function of formal institutions in addressing the knowledge externality of green innovation. Even when enterprises encounter severe green knowledge spillover and patent thickets, EIGC can still provide endogenous impetus for IGIT. Meanwhile, EIGC needs be coupled with a sufficient intensity of external environmental regulations, especially government environmental subsidies, to effectively promote IGIT. This study extends the application of social network structures in the field of green innovation research and provides practical implications for fostering coordinated internal and external drivers of corporate green innovation.
PUBMED_42787634	PubMed	2026	Knowledge, attitudes, and practices related to bovine tuberculosis in Benin: a mixed One Health survey among farmers, veterinarians, and butchers. Bovine tuberculosis (bTB), caused by Mycobacterium bovis, is an underrecognized zoonotic disease in sub-Saharan Africa affecting health, food security, and livelihoods. In Benin, research mainly detects it in animal products and carcasses, but behavioral and sociocultural factors related to exposure and transmission are poorly documented. In areas with livestock farming, pastoral mobility, human-animal interactions, and unsafe animal product consumption, assessing knowledge, attitudes, and practices (KAP) is crucial for understanding transmission within a One Health approach. This study aimed to assess the knowledge, attitudes, and practices related to bovine tuberculosis among livestock farmers, veterinarians, and butchers/slaughterhouse workers in Benin's Agricultural Development Pole 4 (PDA4), while integrating quantitative and qualitative findings within a One Health framework. A mixed-methods cross-sectional survey was conducted among livestock farmers, veterinarians, and slaughterhouse workers across seven municipalities in PDA4. Quantitative data from questionnaires and qualitative data were analyzed thematically. Among livestock farmers (n 164), knowledge was low (41.6%), attitudes favorable (80.0%), and practices moderate (51.5%). A positive correlation existed between knowledge and attitudes ( 0.42; p 0.001), but no link between knowledge and practices. Veterinarians (n 36) had high knowledge (80.0%), but lower attitudes (42.2%) and practices (44.8%), with a negative correlation between knowledge and attitudes ( -0.385; p 0.02). Among butchers (n 11), knowledge was intermediate (63.64%), attitudes very favorable (96.97%), and practices satisfactory (69.09%), with no significant correlations. Qualitative findings identified key behavioral factors like raw milk consumption, traditional practices, economic constraints, and non-biomedical disease perceptions. Major risk factors included close contact, shared water points, and transboundary herd movement. Knowledge of bTB is limited in surveyed departments. Territorial differences influence practices and risks; two communes are more vulnerable because of intensive pastoralism and shared watering points. Knowledge gaps reflect behaviors shaped by awareness, social, economic, cultural, and environmental factors. The study emphasizes tailored, culturally sensitive control strategies within a One Health approach. These findings should be interpreted considering the cross-sectional design, which precludes causal inference, and the limited number of butchers surveyed, which restricts the statistical power of subgroup analyses.
PUBMED_42671827	PubMed	2026	Leading through strain and satisfaction: A mixed methods study of principal well-being through the dual-factor and job demands-resources frameworks. Guided by the job demands-resources model and dual-factor model of mental health, this study used a mixed method survey to examine principals' experiences with job demands, resources, and their compassion fatigue and satisfaction in the context of postpandemic recovery based on a survey study conducted among 247 principals in California. Quantitative and qualitative analyses on survey responses suggested that staffing shortages, the spillover effect of COVID-19, the school community's needs, and workload were identified as top stressors. Regression and path analyses demonstrated a significant and positive association between stressors and compassion fatigue, while self-efficacy and professional support were significantly associated with increased compassion satisfaction among principals. Although district-level connectedness was not strongly associated with compassion fatigue and satisfaction, the positive association between stressors and compassion fatigue was intensified among principals who perceived a stronger sense of district connectedness. Moreover, qualitative analyses revealed that promoting connectedness at district levels via community of practices is one critical aspect of principals' needed professional support. The findings highlight the interactive and multifaceted nature of the association between principal's job demands and resources and their well-being. Practical and policy implications for improving the well-being and mental health of principals and stabilizing principal workforce during the postpandemic recovery were also discussed. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved).
PUBMED_42681505	PubMed	2026	Leptospira and Leptospirosis. Leptospira spp. are morphologically and phylogenetically unique bacteria that are ubiquitous in the environment. Pathogenic species are the agents of leptospirosis, an emerging zoonotic disease transmitted to both humans and animals from the environment contaminated with the urine of reservoir animals. The taxonomy of Leptospira has recently undergone extensive revisions with the use of whole-genome sequences, thus expanding the number of species considerably.
PUBMED_42774690	PubMed	2026	Life-history traits associated to West Nile virus seroprevalence in wild birds: Lessons from the recent outbreaks in Spain. West Nile virus (WNV) is a vector-borne zoonotic pathogen maintained in a bird-mosquito cycle, occasionally infecting humans and horses. It is considered a re-emerging pathogen in Europe, with recurrent outbreaks recently reported in Spain. However, the ecological and evolutionary factors driving spatio-temporal variation in WNV incidence remain unclear. To address this, we analysed a long-term dataset of the presence of WNV neutralizing antibodies in 19,105 serum samples from 48 avian species. Blood samples were collected from birds in southern Spain over two decades, between 2003 and 2024, encompassing periods with varying human WNV incidence. Using phylogenetically informed models, we analysed the ecological and life-history traits associated with WNV seroprevalence in wild birds. Age, phylogeny, locality, and year explained significant variation in seroprevalence. Among first-year individuals, urban-associated species showed higher WNV seroprevalence than species inhabiting forest or shrubland habitats, and it varied significantly based on primary lifestyle. In adults, seroprevalence also correlated positively with body mass and negatively with beak length. Notably, WNV seroprevalence in urban birds increased significantly during years with human outbreak, whereas no such association was found in birds from non-urban habitats. These results suggest that the complexity of WNV cycles may be partly unravelled by incorporating data on avian ecology and phylogeny. In addition, we provide evidence of active virus circulation inside the cities during WNV human outbreaks and suggest the potential of urban bird species as epidemiological sentinels for human outbreaks. Overall, this study underscores the importance of a One Health approach to understand vector-borne zoonotic pathogen dynamics and to inform effective surveillance and control strategies.
PUBMED_42692560	PubMed	2026	Lipid ROS measurement by spectral flow cytometry based on the ratiometric dye BODIPY C11 581/591. The detection and measurement of lipid reactive oxygen species (ROS) is a critical method widely applied in the study of ferroptosis, a recently defined form of iron-dependent programmed cell death characterized by excessive lipid peroxidation and subsequent membrane damage. As ferroptosis research expands into various pathophysiological processes and human diseases, including cancer, immunity and inflammation, and tissue injuries, there is an increasing need for robust methods to measure lipid ROS in heterogenous cell samples, such as in deep immune cell profiling. BODIPY C11 581/591 is a gold-standard ratiometric fluorescent dye that reports the levels of lipid ROS, and has been used in both mechanistic and applied studies demonstrating ferroptosis regulation across multiple cell types. However, its use has largely been confined to traditional flow cytometry due to its extensive spillover into multiple emission channels and its ratiometric properties, which complicate its application in spectral flow cytometry. Herein, we present solutions to these challenges and a comprehensive workflow for the optimization, unmixing, staining, and analysis required to multiplex lipid ROS detection using BODIPY C11 581/591 with high-parameter spectral flow cytometry panels. Our unmixing strategy represents a novel method for separating the fluorescent spectra of two forms of a ratiometric dye, which may also be applicable to other ratiometric dyes in spectral flow cytometry.
PUBMED_42749980	PubMed	2026	Longitudinal Survey of Pathogenic Leptospira Species at a Major Park in Sydney, Australia. Since leptospirosis' re-emergence in Sydney, Australia, concerns about the risk of exposure to pathogenic Leptospira species at urban parks have risen. The current longitudinal environmental survey investigated the temporal detection of pathogenic Leptospira at a major recreational park and explored whether the presence of a flying-fox (Pteropus spp.) camp affects soil Leptospira detection. From February to October 2024, environmental samples and voided faecal samples (flying-fox faeces, and goose faeces as controls) were collected from Centennial Park, Sydney. The samples were tested by a diagnostic 16S rRNA TaqMan quantitative PCR (qPCR) assay, and time series of the monthly minimum cycle threshold (Ct) values were generated to assess cross-correlation. Over the nine-month study period, pathogenic Leptospira was consistently detected in soil and water samples. Despite not being a known reservoir of Leptospira, three voided goose faecal samples tested qPCR-positive (Ct 38.22-38.84). There was no difference in qPCR results of soil collected from the flying-fox camp and another nearby location. The water Ct time series was not correlated with monthly precipitation, but was positively cross-correlated with the Ct time series of soil collected at the flying-fox camp one month prior. Overall, the results suggested temporal ubiquity of pathogenic Leptospira at this park. No direct evidence of flying-foxes' contribution to the environmental Leptospira burden at the park was uncovered, but mechanical movement of Leptospira between soil and water, and the role of birds as mechanical vectors, need further research.
PUBMED_42714832	PubMed	2026	Macroevolutionary Rates of Species Interactions: Approximate Bayesian Inference from Cophylogenies. Understanding the macroevolutionary dynamics of species interactions such as parasitisms, commensalisms, and mutualisms is an important goal in evolutionary ecology. To this end, statistical inference from time-calibrated cophylogenies holds promising potential. However, such inference cannot yet quantify the rates of different types of speciation and extinction that occur in the host and symbiont clades on the same timeline. Here we present an Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) approach that infers rates of six types of speciation or extinction from a cophylogenetic system: (i) host speciation, (ii) symbiont speciation without host-switching, (iii) symbiont speciation with host-switching, (iv) cospeciation, (v) host extinction, and (vi) symbiont extinction. The ABC approach relies on a novel design of summary statistics based on the density curves of pairwise Branch Length Differences (BLenD) of the cophylogeny, which are informative about the relative relationships (ratios) between the six speciation/extinction rates in a single cophylogeny. Here we describe two levels of inference that differ in informativeness and data requirement: the first level infers speciation/extinction rates relative to the total net diversification rate of the cophylogeny without needing information on the time frame of the cophylogeny; the second level infers absolute speciation/extinction rates in units of events per lineage per million years using information on the time frame of the cophylogeny. When the target cophylogeny is sufficiently large, both levels of inference achieve clearly improved accuracy relative to the prior, and both are reasonably honest about uncertainty. Using a cophylogenetic dataset of Batesian mimicry of Pachyrhynchus by Doliops weevils, we show (1) that the first level of inference is sufficient to quantify the relative rates of different speciation/extinction processes within the target cophylogeny and (2) that the second level of inference allows potentially comparing speciation/extinction rates in the target cophylogeny to those in another cophylogeny (i.e., cross-cophylogeny comparisons). We discuss potential improvements for the use of the BLenD curves as summary statistics for simulation-based inference, including potential applications in machine learning approaches. Understanding speciation and extinction rate variation within and between cophylogenetic systems, enabled by this approach and an increasing availability of time-calibrated cophylogenies, has potential implications for various areas in ecology and evolution such as host conservatism, trait-driven diversification, and pathogen spillover risk.
PUBMED_42678097	PubMed	2026	Macroplastics as reservoirs of antimicrobial resistance: a systematic review of evidence, variability and methodological constraints. The environmental accumulation of macroplastics has raised concerns regarding their role in the spread of antimicrobial resistance (AMR). As persistent and mobile substrates, macroplastics provide surfaces for microbial colonization and may act as reservoirs and vectors of antibiotic-resistant bacteria (ARB) and antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs). However, their ecological significance remains insufficiently resolved. Following PRISMA guidelines, we conducted a systematic review of 55 peer-reviewed studies investigating environmentally collected and experimentally exposed macroplastics across marine, estuarine, and freshwater systems. Macroplastics consistently harbor clinically relevant ARB and ARGs, supporting their role as AMR reservoirs. However, evidence for systematic enrichment relative to surrounding matrices is inconsistent, and direct evidence of AMR transfer during environmental transport remains limited. Anthropogenic pressure, ecosystem type, and plastic weathering emerged as key drivers of AMR patterns, with freshwater systems typically showing higher abundance and diversity of ARB and ARGs. Weathering enhances biofilm development and the adsorption of selective agents, whereas the influence of polymer type remains inconclusive. Methodological heterogeneity, including inconsistent quantification strategies, limited environmental controls, and lack of phenotype-genotype linkage, constrains robust inference. We propose a standardized, integrative framework combining environmental baselines, harmonized AMR quantification, and functional validation to improve comparability and support reliable evaluation of macroplastic-associated AMR.
PUBMED_42701380	PubMed	2026	Mapping one health surveillance and networks for vector-borne disease prevention and control in Europe - A scoping review. The increasing vector-borne disease (re)emergence and geographic expansion, driven by environmental change, has been accompanied by growing calls for integrated or One Health surveillance approaches across the human, animal, and environmental health sectors. However, despite widespread advocacy and policy implementation, assessment of the extent to which existing systems achieve cross-sectoral integration remains unclear. There also remains limited evidence regarding existing surveillance capacities and the priorities of key actors within the surveillance ecosystem for transitioning to effectively integrated One Health (OH) surveillance systems, particularly in the context of vector-borne diseases. In this paper, we present the first evidence synthesis and mapping of the One Health Vector Borne Disease (VBD) surveillance systems landscape across Europe and the UK. We conducted targeted searches across Web of Science, PubMed, Google Scholar, and Cochrane Library supplemented by grey literature and institutional searches across national surveillance organisations, which led to retrieval of 25 peer-reviewed papers and 72 distinct VBD surveillance systems. Of the 25 papers, overall profiling showed the OH VBD surveillance literature to be recent and predominantly quantitative, dominated by epidemiological and public health disciplines and concentrated in Northern/Western Europe. Also, there is limited use of evaluation frameworks for surveillance operationalisation and impact assessments across the reviewed literature. Analysis of the 72 surveillance systems showed that despite One Health rhetoric and government funding of over 90% of systems, there was persistent sectoral fragmentation, with systems skewed toward human health and animal health domains. Whilst institutional coordination existed in approximately 75% of systems, operational integration such as coordinated sampling and risk communication remained limited, and inclusion of the environmental health sector was underrepresented. We end by laying out opportunities for future research, with particular emphasis on the evaluation of effectiveness of surveillance and integration of social science and interdisciplinary perspectives. We also highlight opportunities for investing and funding the co-development and cross sectoral operationalisation for VBD surveillance and control.
PUBMED_42748412	PubMed	2026	Mapping the Global Landscape of Antibiotic-Resistant Brucellosis Research: An LDA Topic Modeling and Text Analysis. IntroductionAntibiotic-resistant brucellosis poses a growing challenge at the intersection of antibiotic resistance, zoonotic disease control, and public health. To address the lack of a systematic understanding of how research priorities in the field have evolved, this study conducts a large-scale structural and content analysis of the scientific literature to map thematic distributions, temporal trends, and underexplored research areas.MethodsData were extracted from the Scopus database, encompassing 419 scientific articles. After excluding missing data, 360 articles were selected for analysis. The data processing involved text cleansing, lemmatization, and the creation of bigrams and trigrams. The Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model was utilized to identify themes, and the optimal number of topics was established through the Coherence Score metric. The visualization of results encompassed various methods, including Word Cloud diagrams, topic distribution graphs, and a heatmap illustrating cluster similarities.ResultsScientific output on antibiotic-resistant brucellosis began in 1953 and showed a marked increase after 2010, peaking in 2023. LDA topic modeling identified seven thematic clusters, with the highest concentration of publications in genetics-related resistance, treatment strategies, and Brucella strain diversity. The strongest thematic similarity was observed between genetic resistance and strain diversity clusters (similarity score 0.40), while public health-focused research showed minimal overlap with genetic studies (similarity score 0.04). Temporal analysis indicated a growing emphasis on genetically oriented research after 2010, whereas public health and zoonotic disease control showed highly scattered and minimal activity.ConclusionThe analysis highlights a research landscape, with prevention, vaccination, surveillance, and policy-oriented studies remaining underrepresented, while identifying priority directions for future research, including targeted genomics, novel therapeutic approaches, and One Health-based surveillance.
PUBMED_42730063	PubMed	2026	Maternal Depressive Symptoms and Toddler Sleep: Moderating Effects of Sleep Parenting Practices. BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Toddler sleep is more consolidated than infant sleep and may better reflect long-term sleep regulation. Despite growing interest in maternal mental health, evidence linking maternal depression to toddler sleep remains limited. Moreover, sleep parenting practices may shape this relationship. This study aimed to examine the status of maternal depression, toddler sleep, and sleep parenting practices, as well as the moderating role of these practices in the association between maternal depression and toddler sleep. METHODS: This research employed a cross-sectional design conducted between November 2022 and March 2023 among mothers of toddlers in Taiwan. A total of 126 mothers of toddlers aged 1 to 3 years completed an online survey. The mean age of mothers was 33.01 years (SD 4.33), and the mean age of toddlers was 1.79 years (SD 0.58). Maternal depression was assessed using the Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II, Beck, 1996). Toddler sleep was measured using the Brief Infant Sleep Questionnaire-Reviesd (Mindell et al, 2019), including four indicators: maternal perceived sleep problem, sleep latency, number of nocturnal awakenings, and nighttime sleep duration. Two sleep parenting practices were assessed: co-sleeping (co-sleep vs not co-sleep) and consistency of sleep routines. Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, group comparisons, correlation analyses, and multiple regression analyses. RESULTS: Approximately 33.3% of mothers exhibited depressive tendencies (BDI-II 13). Most toddlers had nighttime sleep duration shorter than 12 hours (91.3%). Around half of the toddlers had sleep latency longer than 45 minutes (50.8%), 34.9% experienced at least two nocturnal awakenings, and 11.9% were reported to have sleep problem. Co-sleep was reported by 51.6% of mothers, and 45.2% had low consistency in their sleep routines ( 5 nights/week). After controlling for child health status, maternal income, and education level, higher maternal depressive symptoms were associated with greater toddler sleep problem severity and longer sleep latency (Bs 0.02 and 0.87, ps 0.05). No moderating effect was found for sleep routine consistency. CONCLUSION: Maternal depression is associated with more severe sleep problem and longer sleep latency in toddlers. Co-sleep may amplify the spillover associations of maternal depression on toddler sleep. For mothers with elevated depressive symptoms, encouraging separate sleeping arrangements may help buffer the association between maternal depression and maternal perceived toddler sleep problem. Further studies to validate these findings are warranted.
PUBMED_42771189	PubMed	2026	Memory of the renin-angiotensin system following heart transplantation or implantation of a left ventricular assist device. BACKGROUND: Renin-angiotensin system (RAS) inhibitors, while not routinely recommended after heart transplantation (HT), are advised in left ventricular assist device (LVAD) recipients to promote reverse remodeling and support myocardial recovery. Whether restoring hemodynamics through HT or LVAD implantation sufficiently resolves neurohormonal activation remains uncertain. METHODS: Patients with end-stage heart failure undergoing HT or LVAD implantation were enrolled in a prospective registry. NT-proBNP, plasma active renin concentration (ARC), aldosterone levels, and the complete profile of angiotensin metabolites were assessed before and after the intervention in 49 HT and 12 LVAD recipients. RESULTS: The use of RAS inhibitors was significantly reduced after HT (p 0.001) and remained comparable in LVAD patients (p 0.453). Both HT and LVAD were associated with reductions in NTproBNP (3015 to 1140 pg/mL; p 0.001; 8980 to 1836 pg/mL; p 0.002) and ARC levels (278 to 87 IU/mL; p 0.001; 847 to 131 IU/mL; p 0.074), which was accompanied by a decrease in the angiotensin burden of the classical RAS axis (AngI + AngII: 159 to 47 ng/L, p 0.001; 214 to 42 ng/L, p 0.155). However, no patient showed normalization of NT-proBNP levels. Additionally, plasma renin remained elevated in 76% of HT and 67% of LVAD recipients, accompanied by detectable Ang II levels. CONCLUSION: Continuing AngII spill-over after HT and LVAD may affect patient outcomes, potentially contributing to complications. The findings support the rationale for cardioprotective treatment, particularly with RAS inhibitors, in most patients, while further studies should address the long-term effect of this strategy.
PUBMED_42770038	PubMed	2026	Metagenomic characterization of the porcine respiratory virome on farms in northern Kazakhstan. Studies of the porcine respiratory virome are essential for understanding the complex viral communities in the porcine respiratory tract and their roles in health and disease. Characterizing the respiratory virome provides insights into the diversity, prevalence, and dynamics of pathogenic and commensal viruses, thereby facilitating the identification of emerging and previously unrecognized respiratory pathogens. Metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) is a method for analyzing viral communities, enabling comprehensive monitoring of circulating and co-detected pathogens in animals. In this study, mNGS on the Illumina platform was used to characterize the porcine respiratory virome in Kazakhstan. The study included 150 nasopharyngeal swabs collected from commercial pig farms in northern Kazakhstan. Viral sequences were assigned to the families Parvoviridae, Herpesviridae, Picornaviridae, Astroviridae, and Anelloviridae. High coverage was achieved for Porcine cytomegalovirus, Porcine parvovirus 5, and Porcine parvovirus 7, including reconstruction of a nearly complete PPV7 genome. Significant variability in mapped read counts and sequencing depth was observed across samples, reflecting heterogeneity in the detection of viral nucleic acids within the sampled population. Phylogenetic analysis showed that all identified viruses belong to globally circulating evolutionary lineages and do not form new divergent clusters. Moreover, respiratory and gastrointestinal virus sequences were often detected simultaneously in nasopharyngeal samples, indicating a complex composition of viral nucleic acids in the upper respiratory tract of pigs. Pigs are important reservoirs and intermediate hosts for zoonotic viruses. Metagenomic studies contribute not only to animal health and disease control but also to One Health initiatives by strengthening early warning systems for pathogens with epidemic or pandemic potential. The results demonstrate the high viral diversity in domestic pigs in Kazakhstan and confirm the effectiveness of mNGS as a tool for epizootiological surveillance and molecular monitoring of viral infections in livestock.
PUBMED_42749191	PubMed	2026	MicroRNAs in veterinary viral diseases: A comprehensive review from molecular mechanisms to clinical translation. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNA molecules, approximately 22 nucleotides in length, that regulate post-transcriptional gene expression and have emerged as pivotal modulators of host-virus interactions. Veterinary viral diseases continue to pose substantial challenges to animal health, livestock productivity, food security, and public health, particularly due to their zoonotic potential. While miRNA research has advanced considerably, a comprehensive and critically integrated understanding of their biological functions and clinical applications across veterinary viral diseases remains incomplete. This comprehensive critical narrative synthesis addresses four overarching research questions: (1) What conserved and species-specific miRNA-mediated mechanisms govern major veterinary viral diseases? (2) What contextual factors determine antiviral vs. proviral duality? (3) To what extent do circulating miRNA signatures offer diagnostic and prognostic utility? (4) What translational barriers currently prevent clinical implementation, and how can the One Health framework help overcome them? Integrating three interconnected dimensions-molecular mechanisms, pathogen-specific responses, and translational applications-the review synthesizes evidence across PRRSV, avian oncogenic viruses (MDV, ALV), the immunosuppressive IBDV, FMD, BVDV, Ebola, Hendra, Rabies, and aquatic viral diseases. A key contribution of this review is the proposal of a four-axis contextual framework that explains the antiviral/proviral duality of miRNAs, and a 'One miRNA, One Health' convergence model with a concrete implementation roadmap. Key findings include: (a) a four-axis contextual framework (cell type, infection stage, viral strain, host-viral miRNA competition) that explains the antiviral/proviral duality; (b) virus-encoded miRNAs (v-miRNAs) as lower-risk therapeutic targets due to their absence from uninfected host genomes; (c) circulating miRNA biomarkers validated only at proof-of-concept stage (TRL 1-3), with no veterinary product yet at TRL 4; and (d) zoonotic conservation of miR-155, miR-146a, miR-21, and miR-122 across human and veterinary pathogens, supporting a 'One miRNA, One Health' convergence strategy. Critical short-term priorities are standardized pre-analytical protocols, open-access veterinary miRNA databases, and multicenter validation in natural infection cohorts.
PUBMED_42790045	PubMed	2026	Microbial community structure and antibiotic resistance genes in Dinaric karst groundwater under contrasting hydrological conditions. Karst aquifers are vulnerable drinking water resources, yet microbiome-resistome studies remain scarce. We investigated microbial community composition and antibiotic resistance gene (ARG) profiles in five karst groundwater sources along an anthropogenic gradient in coastal Croatia under contrasting hydrological conditions. 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing showed that hydrological conditions were associated with community composition. Distance-based redundancy analysis identified total organic carbon as the variable associated with community structure, while ammonium and Escherichia coli were associated with dry hydrological conditions. High-throughput qPCR (96 gene targets) revealed distinct resistome profiles across sites and conditions. Sites with greater anthropogenic influence showed higher ARG abundances than the reference site, particularly under wet hydrological conditions. Efflux pump genes were prevalent across sites and conditions, while aminoglycoside and trimethoprim ARGs were particularly prominent at the most impacted site under dry conditions. Escherichia/Shigella and Klebsiella showed the broadest ranges of significant ARG correlations under wet and dry hydrological conditions, respectively, although several associations were sensitive to individual sampling locations. Clinically relevant ARGs, including vancomycin and colistin resistance genes, were detected at low relative abundances. These findings demonstrate associations between hydrological conditions, anthropogenic influence, and karst groundwater microbiomes and resistomes, highlighting the potential of molecular AMR surveillance in drinking water sources.
PUBMED_42765037	PubMed	2026	Microbial contamination and antimicrobial resistance in dried fish from informal markets in Gauteng Province, South Africa: A One Health food safety assessment. BACKGROUND AND AIM: Dried fish sold in informal markets is an affordable source of protein but may be vulnerable to microbial contamination because of inadequate hygiene and handling practices. This study aimed to assess microbial contamination levels, identify bacterial isolates using 16S rRNA sequencing, and determine the antimicrobial resistance (AMR) profiles of bacteria recovered from sun-dried, smoked, and salted fish sold in informal markets in Gauteng Province, South Africa. The research addressed limited information on the microbiological quality and AMR of dried fish sold in South African informal markets, particularly the integration of culture-based, molecular, and resistance-profiling approaches in a One Health framework. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 140 dried fish samples (80 sun-dried, 40 smoked, and 20 salted) were collected from 12 informal markets in Johannesburg and Pretoria using convenience sampling. Total bacterial counts (TBC) were determined on nutrient agar, followed by phenotypic characterization and molecular identification using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed using the disk diffusion method against seven antibiotics. Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, analysis of variance with Bonferroni correction, and chi-square tests, with statistical significance set at p 0.05. RESULTS: TBC ranged from 0.8 10 to 5.34 10 colony forming units/g, with a significant difference between sun-dried and salted fish after Bonferroni adjustment (p 0.012). Sixty-seven bacterial isolates were identified, dominated by Clostridium spp. (10/67, 14.92%), Staphylococcus spp. (8/67, 11.94%), Staphylococcus xylosus (6/67, 8.95%), and Klebsiella pneumoniae (5/67, 7.46%), including Clostridium botulinum (2/67, 2.98%). High resistance was observed to streptomycin (73.1%) and erythromycin (58.2%), and several bacterial isolates exhibited multidrug resistance. No significant differences in bacterial counts were detected among sampling locations (p 0.457). CONCLUSION: This study provides critical evidence of multidrug-resistant bacteria, including C. botulinum, in dried fish from informal markets, highlighting serious food safety and public health risks. Findings underscore the need for enhanced hygiene practices, vendor training, and regulatory oversight to mitigate contamination and the spread of AMR in informal food systems.
PUBMED_42746048	PubMed	2026	Microbial diversity, antimicrobial resistance and zoonotic implications of the reptile gut microbiota: an updated review. The reptilian gastrointestinal tract harbors a complex and dynamic ecosystem of microorganisms that plays a fundamental and multifaceted role in host nutrition, immune function, and overall physiological homeostasis. This gut microbiome exhibited remarkable phylogenetic and functional diversity, intricately shaped by a confluence of host evolutionary history, dietary strategy, environmental context, captive status, and life history traits. Beyond its critical importance for reptilian health and fitness, this internal microbial reservoir is of significant and growing concern from a public health perspective, serving as a major source of zoonotic pathogens, most notably non-typhoidal Salmonella, and as a critical and underexplored hotspot for the emergence, amplification, and dissemination of antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs), a dimension that forms the central theme of this review and is systematically examined across host ecology, captive management, and the global pet trade continuum. This comprehensive review synthesizes contemporary research on the gut microbiota across key reptilian taxa, including popular companion species such as lizards such as Eublepharis macularius and Tiliqua scincoides, snakes such as Pantherophis guttatus, Python regius and chelonians. We undertake a detailed analysis of the foundational drivers shaping microbial community structure, assembly and stability, exploring the delicate balance between core symbiotic residents, putatively beneficial probiotic candidates, and pathogenic entities. A critical and extensive focus is placed on the distribution, ecological drivers, and transmission pathways of antimicrobial resistance genes within this ecosystem, highlighting its underappreciated role in the global One Health continuum. The review further elaborates on the indispensable metabolic contributions of the microbiota to host fitness, the complex tripartite interactions involving host, microbiome and parasitic helminths or protozoa, and the implications of dysbiosis. Finally, we evaluated practical and emerging strategies for targeted microbiome modulation aimed at enhancing captive management, supporting conservation breeding outcomes, mitigating zoonotic risks and promoting sustainable herpetoculture.
PUBMED_42744991	PubMed	2026	Microbial diversity: the essential foundation for life on our planet. The biological basis of life on Earth is microbial diversity that ensures human health, agricultural productivity, ecological balance, and ecosystem functioning. Microorganisms enable ecosystem restoration through bioremediation, maintain soil fertility, support plant growth, manage vital biogeochemical cycles, and contribute to climate resilience. Precision probiotics, postbiotics, faecal microbiota transplantation, and personalized microbiome medicine are the examples of emerging microbiome-based therapies that offer promising therapeutic opportunities. In humans, the gut microbial community is essential for immune regulation, metabolism, and disease prevention. In terrestrial ecological systems, interactions between plants, fungi, bacteria, and other soil microorganisms improve carbon sequestration, nutrient cycling, stress resilience, and sustainable agricultural productivity in the given effects of climate change. Emerging uses in agriculture, environmental restoration, and medicine are made possible by advancements in multi-omic techniques, synthetic microbial genomes, microbiome engineering, and artificial intelligence. Considering these developments, issues with ecological complexity, long-term validation, standardization, and field scale application still exist. Therefore, preserving microbial diversity is important for conserving ecological resilience and strengthening the One Health framework, which highlights the mutual dependance of health of animal, human, plant, and environment. This review summarizes what has been discovered about ecological and biomedical relevance of microbiome, identifies important research gaps, highlighting emerging technologies, and evaluates potential future directions for using microbiome to support planetary sustainability.
PUBMED_42677876	PubMed	2026	Microbiome Insights Into Zoonotic Risk at Wildlife-Human Interfaces in a Transitioning Landscape in Thailand. Land-use change is accelerating worldwide and is one of the strongest predictors of emerging zoonotic disease. These ecological transitions can disrupt host microbiomes, change pathogen carriage, and create novel opportunities for spillover at wildlife-livestock-human interfaces. Yet, little is known about how reforested landscapes influence microbiome diversity and the distribution of zoonotic bacteria in key reservoir hosts such as bats, rodents, treeshrews, and domestic dogs. We characterized the rectal microbiome of bats, rodents, and domestic dogs sampled across a land-use gradient in Nan Province, Thailand, spanning caves, forests, reforested zones, plantations, and village habitats. Full-length 16S rRNA sequencing was used to assess host- and habitat-specific patterns at the bacteria species level. Pathogen-associated taxa were identified, and their potential transmission pathways were explored using network analysis and qPCR validation targeting Salmonella spp. From 102 samples, 1816 taxa were identified, including 354 documented human pathogens. Hierarchical Modeling of Species Communities models confirmed that host species explained far more variation in pathogen occurrences than habitat type, with dogs, Menetes berdmorei, and Scotophilus heathii exhibiting particularly high pathogen diversity. Domestic dogs also displayed high network centrality and move freely across habitats, positioning them as a key bridging host. Salmonella screening detected both Salmonella enterica (serovars Newport/Typhimurium) and the reptile-associated Salmonella bongori, the latter unexpectedly in bats and rodents, with variable concordance between metabarcoding and qPCR results. Our findings demonstrate that host identity, more than habitat type, structures pathogen-associated microbiomes across a reforested landscape. Understanding these dynamics is essential to anticipate pathogen flow and strengthen One Health surveillance.
PUBMED_42757802	PubMed	2026	Microplastics in urban environments: The dog as a bioindicator of exposure and human gastrointestinal risk. INTRODUCTION: Microplastics, particles smaller than 5 mm, are an environmental and public health concern due to their widespread presence in domestic environments. They affect humans and animals that share water, food, and environments. In Santo Domingo (Ecuador), companion dogs can act as environmental sentinels, reflecting exposure to these contaminants and their potential association to health problems. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate microplastics in dog feces in Santo Domingo and their possible relationship with domestic plastic waste and gastrointestinal diseases in their human tutors. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Feces from 27 domestic dogs were analyzed using potassium hydroxide (KOH) digestion and microscopy to identify and quantify microplastics. Daily production of plastic waste in contact with food and the presence of gastrointestinal diseases in tutors were recorded. Statistical analyses were applied to evaluate correlations and associations, considering a significance level of 0.05. RESULTS: Fecal samples from 21 dogs contained microplastic particles, with an average of 288.89 microplastic particles per gram, predominantly plastic fibers. The northeastern and northwestern areas showed the highest levels. No significant correlation was found between plastic waste generation and microplastics load (p 0.194), but a significant association was found with gastrointestinal diseases in tutors (p 0.027; Cramer's V 0.463). CONCLUSIONS: Dogs reflect domestic exposure to microplastics, and its study provides evidence of shared risks to both human and animal health. The need to control plastic pollution and promote inter-sectorial preventive research and actions under the One Health approach is reinforced.
PUBMED_42689166	PubMed	2026	Mobilome-driven antimicrobial resistance in a one health context: evidence and lessons from Africa. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is one of the most urgent global health threats and is increasingly recognized as a One Health challenge driven by interactions among human, animal, and environmental reservoirs. Central to the emergence and dissemination of AMR across these interfaces are mobile genetic elements (MGEs), which form an interconnected mobilome capable of transferring resistance genes across bacterial taxa and ecological niches. These elements facilitate the accumulation and spread of multidrug resistance determinants and are shaped by co-selective pressures operating at the animal-environment-human interface. Despite their critical role, genomic surveillance of MGEs remains limited, particularly in high-burden regions such as Africa. This narrative review synthesizes evidence from published genomic surveillance studies, primarily whole-genome sequencing-based analyses, to examine the distribution and dynamics of AMR genes and MGEs across One Health interfaces. We highlight animal-environmental systems as major hotspots for mobilome-driven resistance dissemination and also evaluate key advances, methodological approaches, and persistent surveillance challenges and gaps specific across Africa. By integrating findings from diverse genomic studies, and highlighting key lessons and implementation gaps from One Health studies across Africa, this review underscores the need for coordinated One Health surveillance strategies to better capture mobilome dynamics and inform sustainable AMR control efforts.
PUBMED_42733478	PubMed	2026	Modeling climate-driven changes in potential zoonotic virus density across Australia. Over 70% of emerging infectious diseases originate from zoonotic sources, making spillover risk prediction important for public health preparedness. This study investigates how potential zoonotic virus density (PVD) may change across Australia in 2050 under climate change. PVD captures ecological hazard, while actual spillover risk additionally depends on wildlife-human contact and pathogen transmission dynamics. Using an Extra Trees Regressor trained on 2020 climate outputs from eight global climate models (GCMs) under two emissions scenarios, and using projected 2020 PVD as the response variable, we generated spatial re-projections of climate suitability for PVD under 2050 climate conditions. Re-projections revealed spatial redistribution rather than a uniform change, with higher projected suitability across parts of western and southwestern Australia and lower suitability in some eastern areas relative to the 2020 projections. Relative humidity was the strongest overall climatic predictor, while the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) analysis highlighted model-specific effects of precipitation, water vapor, and solar radiation. Local Moran's I showed persistent spatial clustering across coastal and inland areas.
PUBMED_42722640	PubMed	2026	Modeling reptile virus infection in vitro using Python regius airway organoids. Zoonoses pose substantial global health risks, highlighting the need to better understand animal-to-human transmission. Reptiles are increasingly recognized as hosts of diverse pathogens, including numerous viruses, yet the diversity and prevalence of reptile pathogens, as well as their potential risk to humans, remain poorly understood. Here, we establish and characterize airway organoids derived from Python regius, providing an in vitro model to study reptile airway infection. Through de novo assembly of a Python regius reference genome, we characterize airway organoids at single-cell resolution, which suggests the presence of diverse cell populations including ionocytes, ciliated, secretory, goblet, endocrine, tuft, and basal cells. The organoids support productive infection with Ball Python Nidovirus (BPNV) and mount a robust epithelial antiviral response through the induction of interferon-stimulated genes, cytokines, and genes involved in chemical defense. As a proof-of-concept, treating organoids with antiviral drugs during infection reduces BPNV levels, highlighting the model's utility for drug testing. By providing a reductionist system of the serpentes airway, these organoids constitute a physiologically relevant in vitro model to study reptile viruses and host-pathogen interactions in their native host.
PUBMED_42725071	PubMed	2026	Modelling the Transmission Dynamics and Risk of Ovine Cystic Echinococcosis in Argentina Using the CEST Model (Cystic Echinococcosis Stochastic Transmission Model). BACKGROUND: Cystic echinococcosis (CE) is a neglected zoonotic disease caused by Echinococcus granulosus sensu lato (s.l.). Exerting substantial health and economic impact on humans, and the agricultural industry of affected countries, CE is one of 20 neglected tropical diseases included in the 2021-2030 World Health Organization (WHO) roadmap to attain the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. METHODS: The CEST model, a stochastic disease transmission model for CE, captures the lifecycle and disease dynamics of the parasite in dogs and sheep. Calibrated with data from R o Negro, Argentina, and incorporating annual fluctuations in livestock husbandry, the model includes historical interventions employed in the R o Negro control programme since its onset (1980) in a retrospective analysis. A prospective analysis models various intervention scenarios (2025-2035). Dog deworming with praziquantel and sheep vaccination with EG95 are simulated at different frequencies and coverage levels. Annual CE prevalence in dogs, sheep and predicted human risk are presented for each intervention. RESULTS: Monthly deworming most rapidly reduced dog prevalence and environmental egg burden; however, increasing vaccine coverage from 60% to 80% achieved a greater impact on sheep prevalence. Vaccination was less effective at 60% coverage, highlighting the importance of achieving the higher coverage and full dosing of animals in control programmes. Although current interventions can reduce disease prevalence in dogs and sheep, even when they are modelled at increased frequencies and coverage, sporadic transmission is predicted to continue. To break the status quo, alternative intervention packages need to be considered. CONCLUSIONS: Enhancing CE control requires additional measures, including a deeper understanding of factors contributing to disease persistence despite current control efforts. The CEST model can be extended to simulate additional interventions, making it a valuable tool for policymakers and stakeholders in planning CE control efforts beyond the Sustainable Development Goals.
PUBMED_42747621	PubMed	2026	Molecular Occurrence, Co-infections and Genetic Characterization of Sarcocystis miescheriana, Toxoplasma gondii and Neospora caninum in Wild Boars (Sus scrofa) from T rkiye. PURPOSE: Wild boars (Sus scrofa) play a pivotal role in the sylvatic cycle of tissue cyst-forming apicomplexan parasites. However, molecular epidemiological data from Turkish populations is limited. The objective of this study was to ascertain the molecular prevalence, genetic diversity, and co-infection patterns of Sarcocystis spp., Toxoplasma gondii, and Neospora caninum in wild boars from the Central Black Sea Region of T rkiye. METHODS: A total of 100 muscle tissue samples were collected from hunted wild boars. The samples were then subjected to artificial digestion and histopathological examination. In addition, a series of PCR assays were performed, including a multiplex PCR targeting the cox1 gene and a conventional PCR targeting the 18S rRNA gene for Sarcocystis spp. The study also included specific PCRs for the 529 bp repetitive element of T. gondii and the NC5 region of N. caninum. Age- and sex-adjusted associations for T. gondii and N. caninum infection were further examined using multivariable logistic regression. RESULTS: Sarcocystis miescheriana was detected in 92% of the animals, whereas the zoonotic S. suihominis was not found. Phylogenetic analysis of cox1 sequences placed the obtained isolate close to European strains. T. gondii DNA was present in 50% of the wild boars and N. caninum DNA in 38%. Mixed infections were frequent: 56% of the animals harboured at least two parasite species and 28% carried all three. In multivariable analysis, adult age was significantly associated with T. gondii infection (adjusted OR 3.77, P 0.022), with a similar but non-significant trend for N. caninum (adjusted OR 3.21, P 0.055); sex was not a significant predictor for either parasite. Triple infection was numerically more common in older animals, consistent with cumulative environmental exposure over time, although this trend did not reach statistical significance (P 0.129). CONCLUSION: These results update the molecular epidemiology of tissue cyst-forming apicomplexans in Turkish wild boars and reinforce the importance of sustained One Health surveillance at the wildlife-livestock-human interface.
PUBMED_42732532	PubMed	2026	Molecular Surveillance Finds No Influenza A Infection in Domestic Cats in Dhaka. Influenza A virus (IAV) is a zoonotic pathogen with a broad host range, including birds, humans, and various mammalian species. Domestic cats have been documented as incidental hosts, particularly in regions with ongoing avian influenza outbreaks. Cats are important companion animals in Dhaka, Bangladesh; however, data on IAV infection in this population are limited. This study aimed to investigate the presence of IAV in domestic cats in Dhaka through molecular surveillance. A total of 50 nasal swab samples were collected from domestic cats with mild respiratory signs presented from different areas of Dhaka city. Samples were tested for IAV using real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) targeting the matrix (M) gene. All 50 samples tested negative for IAV. No evidence of IAV infection was found within the sampled population, suggesting low or no detectable zoonotic risk from domestic cats during the study period. These findings provide baseline data on IAV surveillance in domestic cats in Dhaka. However, given the limited sample size and sampling period, larger longitudinal surveillance studies are warranted to better assess the potential for IAV spillover in high-risk settings.
PUBMED_42738487	PubMed	2026	Molecular Survey and Genetic Characterization of Tetratrichomonas buttreyi and Pentatrichomonas hominis in Horses in Shanxi Province, Northern China. Trichomonads include species of veterinary and zoonotic importance, yet infections with trichomonads in horses remain uncharacterized in Shanxi Province, Northern China. In the present study, we conducted a molecular survey of Tetratrichomonas buttreyi and Pentatrichomonas hominis using 631 horse fecal samples collected from Datong, Taiyuan, and Yuncheng cities in Shanxi Province between March and June 2023. Nested PCR assays targeting the small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) gene were used to detect the two trichomonad species. The overall molecular prevalences were 3.7% (23/631; 95% CI, 2.5-5.5%) for T. buttreyi and 0.8% (5/631; 95% CI, 0.3-1.9%) for P. hominis. T. buttreyi prevalence differed significantly by region and management mode but not by age or sex. P. hominis was detected only in Datong City, resulting in a significant regional difference; however, age, sex, and management mode were not significantly associated with P. hominis prevalence. Five representative T. buttreyi sequences and one representative P. hominis sequence were obtained in the present study. Among these sequences, two T. buttreyi sequences shared 100% nucleotide identity with reference sequences from pigs, cattle, and horses; three showed only minor nucleotide variation. The representative P. hominis sequence clustered with the zoonotic genotype CC1, suggesting that horses may form part of the broader host network of P. hominis, though further work is needed to establish horses' reservoir competence or confirm their role in the transmission. These findings provide the first molecular evidence of T. buttreyi and P. hominis in horses from Shanxi Province, and establish a baseline for future surveillance and One Health risk assessments.
PUBMED_42771063	PubMed	2026	Molecular and Epidemiological Surveillance of Sporothrix spp. in Cats and Dogs from Southern Brazil. Sporotrichosis, a subcutaneous mycosis caused by Sporothrix spp., has emerged as a major zoonotic disease in Brazil, primarily driven by Sporothrix brasiliensis. The southern state of Rio Grande do Sul exhibits distinctive ecological and climatic conditions that may shape the persistence and distribution of this pathogen in this region. This study conducted molecular and epidemiological surveillance of feline and canine sporotrichosis in southern Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. A total of 100 isolates from the culture collection of the Veterinary Mycology Laboratory at the Federal University of Pelotas (UFPel) were analyzed by PCR targeting the calmodulin (CAL) gene for species identification. Fourteen representative isolates were sequenced and subjected to phylogenetic analysis using the Maximum Likelihood method, including reference sequences from Brazil, Paraguay, and Argentina. Epidemiological and clinical variables, including host species, sex, lesion site, and morphology, were evaluated to characterize the epidemiological and clinical profiles of sporotrichosis in the study region. S. brasiliensis and S. schenckii were identified in 97% and 3% of the isolates, respectively. The CAL-based phylogeny confirmed the monophyly of S. brasiliensis and revealed low intraspecific variability with regional clustering among southern Brazilian isolates. When interpreted within the Southern Cone context, the topology indicated a close genetic affinity between isolates from Rio Grande do Sul and reference sequences from Argentina and Paraguay. These findings confirm the territorial expansion of S. brasiliensis across southern Brazil and emphasize the importance of molecular surveillance for detecting and tracking the circulating lineages. Continuous regional monitoring is crucial for strengthening One Health strategies and mitigating the zoonotic spread of sporotrichosis in the Southern Cone.
PUBMED_42722141	PubMed	2026	Molecular characterisation of a putative virulence factor LIC10280 from Leptospira interrogans in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Leptospirosis, a widespread zoonotic disease caused by Leptospira interrogans, poses a major public health challenge, particularly in tropical regions. Despite progress in genomic studies, many putative virulence factors (VFs) remain uncharacterised. This study focuses on LIC10280, a conserved hypothetical protein identified as a potential VF through yeast-based screening. In silico analysis predicted that LIC10280 possesses a cleavable signal peptide and a -barrel fold in its mature region, features common to secreted bacterial proteins. BlastP analysis showed that LIC10280 is conserved in pathogenic Leptospira but absent in saprophytic species, suggesting a role in pathogenesis. Growth assay in budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae revealed that only the full-length LIC10280 inhibited yeast growth and reduced cell viability as confirmed in FUN-1 staining. Fluorescence microscopy study revealed that mature part of LIC10280 was involved in localisation to yeast nucleus without vesicular trafficking. A yeast genetic screen showed that deletion of SCH9, a component of the TORC1 signalling pathway, partially suppressed LIC10280-induced toxicity, implicating a possible link to nutrient-sensing or stress-response pathways. Together, these findings provide new insights into the potential function of LIC10280 and highlight the value of yeast as a model system for studying putative virulence factors of L. interrogans.
PUBMED_42700325	PubMed	2026	Molecular characterization and co-occurrence of ESBL, carbapenemase and mcr-1 genes in Klebsiella pneumoniae from poultry production systems in Pakistan. BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Klebsiella pneumoniae is an important opportunistic pathogen with a high capacity to acquire antimicrobial resistance determinants. However, data on the distribution and co-occurrence of extended-spectrum -lactamase (ESBL), carbapenemase and plasmid-mediated colistin resistance genes in poultry-associated K. pneumoniae in Pakistan remain limited. This study investigated the prevalence, antimicrobial resistance profiles and molecular characteristics of K. pneumoniae recovered from commercial broiler farms, backyard poultry flocks and retail poultry markets. METHODS: A total of 900 samples were collected from commercial broiler farms, backyard poultry flocks and retail poultry markets in Faisalabad Division, Pakistan, between September 2024 and April 2025. K. pneumoniae isolates were identified using conventional biochemical testing, API 20E, MALDI-TOF MS and rpoB gene amplification. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed according to CLSI 2024 recommendations, and PCR was used to detect ESBL, carbapenemase, plasmid-mediated quinolone, aminoglycoside, sulfonamide, tetracycline, chloramphenicol and colistin resistance genes. RESULTS: K. pneumoniae was recovered from 303/900 samples (33.7%). Among the isolates, 199 (65.7%) were multidrug-resistant (MDR) and 48 (15.8%) were extensively drug-resistant (XDR). Commercial farm isolates showed a greater resistance burden than isolates from backyard flocks and retail markets. The most frequently detected ESBL genes were blaCTXM-15 and blaTEM, while blaNDM, blaKPC and blaOXA-48 were detected among carbapenem-resistant isolates. Colistin resistance was detected in 5.9% of isolates, with mcr-1 identified among the resistant isolates. Twenty-one distinct resistance gene combinations were identified, including combinations involving ESBL, carbapenemase and colistin resistance determinants. CONCLUSIONS: Poultry-associated K. pneumoniae showed a substantial burden of multidrug resistance and diverse combinations of clinically important resistance determinants, particularly among isolates from commercial farms. The findings support strengthened antimicrobial stewardship, farm-level biosecurity and integrated molecular surveillance within poultry production systems as components of a One Health approach to AMR control.
PUBMED_42780288	PubMed	2026	Molecular detection and culture of Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis in pasteurized and raw retail milk in Kampala, Uganda. BACKGROUND: The hypothesis that Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP) is a zoonotic pathogen has gained traction with the repeated isolation of MAP from patients with Crohn's disease. As consumption of contaminated milk and dairy products represents a primary suspected route for human exposure to MAP, this study was designed to investigate the presence of MAP in retail milk sold in Kampala, Uganda's Capital and central hub for the nation's milk distribution. METHODS: A total of 772 milk samples were collected and analysed sequentially using two molecular assays targeting the IS900 gene sequence, with positive findings validated by DNA sequencing. To determine MAP viability, samples were cultured on Herrold's egg yolk media (HEYM) slants supplemented with selective antibiotics and mycobactin J. RESULTS: MAP DNA was confirmed by nested PCR and subsequent sequencing in 2.3% of the samples, with equal frequencies in pasteurized and unpasteurized milk. Additionally, one raw milk sample demonstrated viable MAP growth by culture. CONCLUSION: The findings of contamination of commercial milk with MAP in the Uganda's Capital aligns with the reported prevalence of cattle paratuberculosis in the country and underscore the need for rigorous protocols for preparation of milk and dairy products to reduce contaminating viable pathogenic bacteria including MAP. Consequently, more efforts toward control of paratuberculosis in livestock are required to mitigate possible public health risks through foodborne pathogens.
PUBMED_42700683	PubMed	2026	Molecular detection of Leptospira spp. in urinary and vaginal samples of domestic and free-roaming cats in Tehran, Iran. OBJECTIVE: Leptospirosis is a globally important zoonotic disease associated with renal and hepatic injury. Cats are frequently exposed to Leptospira spp., yet their epidemiological role remains unclear. This study aimed to determine whether Leptospira DNA could be detected in feline vaginal samples, in addition to urine, using Nested-PCR. Secondary objectives were to determine the proportion of PCR-positive cats and assess renal involvement by comparing renal parameters between PCR-positive and PCR-negative cats. METHODS: Seventy-six domestic and free-roaming cats were examined in Tehran, in 2025. Urine samples were collected from all cats and vaginal swabs from female cats. Nested-PCR targeting the 16S rRNA (rrs) gene was performed on both sample types followed by confirmatory sequencing of representative amplicons. Renal status was assessed using biochemical, hematological, and urinalysis parameters in all cats. RESULTS: Leptospira DNA was detected in 15/76 cats (19.7%). Positive results were obtained from urine samples in 10/76 cats (13.1%) and from vaginal swabs in 5/61 female cats (8.2%), with no concordant positive results between urine and vaginal samples (95% CIs reported). Vaginal PCR identified Leptospira DNA in cats that were negative by urine PCR. No significant differences were observed in biochemical, hematological or urinalysis parameters between PCR-positive and PCR-negative cats. CONCLUSIONS: Leptospira DNA was detected in urine and vaginal samples of both domestic and free-roaming cats, frequently in subclinical animals without observable clinical signs. The absence of concordance between urine and vaginal PCR results suggests that vaginal sampling may provide complementary molecular detection to urine testing. Further investigation is warranted to elucidate the biological significance and clinical implications of Leptospira DNA detection in feline vaginal samples.
PUBMED_42778121	PubMed	2026	Molecular detection of Trypanosoma lewisi: association between Xenopsylla cheopis and Rattus spp. in densely populated residential areas. Trypanosoma lewisi is a flagellated hemoprotozoan that primarily infects rats (Rattus spp.), with Xenopsylla cheopis acting as its cyclical vector. Although typically host-specific, occasional zoonotic transmission to humans (zoonosis) has raised One Health concerns, particularly in densely populated areas with poor sanitation. This study aimed to determine the infection rate of T. lewisi in both X. cheopis and rats using molecular approaches. Rats were trapped in residential areas of Kampung Mandar and Lateng Villages in Banyuwangi, East Java, Indonesia. Fleas were obtained by combing the rats' fur, and blood samples were subsequently collected intracardially. Identification of X. cheopis was performed using stereomicroscopy, scanning electron microscopy, and PCR employing specific primers Xchvgsc F and Xchvgsc R. Detection of T. lewisi was conducted via PCR using LEW1S/LEW1R primers. Sequencing and phylogenetic analyses were performed using GAPDH and SSU gene markers. A total of 152 rats were captured, consisting of Rattus norvegicus (53.29%) and R. tanezumi (46.71%). The prevalence of T. lewisi infection was 23.68% in rats and 71.91% in fleas. Among the 89 flea-infested rats, 46 (51.69%) were negative for T. lewisi in their blood but carried T. lewisi-positive X. cheopis fleas. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that T. lewisi from rats and fleas clustered within the same lineage, indicating genetic similarity between parasites detected in the two hosts. These findings demonstrate the presence of genetically similar T. lewisi parasites in rats and naturally infected X. cheopis fleas, suggesting that the parasite may circulate between these hosts within rodent populations. The present study also underscores the importance of integrated rodent and flea surveillance for understanding the epidemiology and circulation of T. lewisi in rodent populations.
PUBMED_42768131	PubMed	2026	Molecular detection of feline viruses in free-ranging European wildcats (Felis s. silvestris) of the Harz Mountains, Germany. Many infectious diseases commonly affecting domestic cats may pose potential threats to wild felid populations. Several established contagious feline viruses - including feline leukemia virus (FeLV), feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), feline coronavirus (FCoV), feline calicivirus (FCV), feline herpesvirus (FHV), and feline parvovirus (FPV) - are well-known drivers of disease epidemiology. In addition, recently identified agents such as feline circovirus (FeCV), feline morbillivirus (FeMV) and other novel paramyxoviruses as well as polyomaviruses may represent emerging risks to wild populations. We conducted a comprehensive molecular epidemiological survey to investigate the occurrence of these viruses in free-ranging European wildcats (Felis s. silvestris) from the Harz Mountains, a low mountain range in central Germany. A total of 42 individuals were sampled between 2010 and 2018. Molecular screening was performed using a comprehensive set of conventional PCR, reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR), and quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) assays to detect viral nucleic acids. FeLV DNA was detected in 5/42 individuals (11.90%), and FPV DNA was detected in 2/42 wildcats (4.76%). Overall, viral nucleic acid was identified in seven animals (16.67%). No evidence of the remaining target viruses was found using the respective (q)RT-PCR and conventional PCR assays. However, negative PCR results should be interpreted with caution due to the exclusive use of long-term ethanol-preserved spleen samples, which may have reduced analytical sensitivity. The findings provide molecular evidence of FPV and FeLV, in free-ranging European wildcats in the Harz Mountains. Continued surveillance remains essential to better understand pathogen dynamics, evaluate potential spillover from domestic cats, and inform conservation strategies aimed at safeguarding wild felid populations in Central Europe.
PUBMED_42707236	PubMed	2026	Molecular epidemiology of Enterocytozoon bieneusi in humans and domestic animals from Heilongjiang province, China: high animal prevalence, novel genotypes, and possible zoonotic implications in rural households. INTRODUCTION: Enterocytozoon bieneusi is a zoonotic parasite causing diarrheal disease in rural settings with frequent human-animal contact. METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study in Heilongjiang, China, enrolling 69 households across 10 villages. Humans and domestic animals were sampled. Nested PCR targeting the ITS region was performed. Genotypes were determined by sequencing, and genetic diversity was assessed using DnaSP. RESULTS: Human prevalence was 11.0% (13/118), while overall animal prevalence was 23.4% (162/693), with sheep being the highest (66.7%), followed by pigs (46.1%) and geese (20.5%). Prevalence was significantly higher in mammals than poultry (32.9% vs. 13.9%; p 0.001). Sequence analysis yielded 29 distinct genotypes (10 known, 19 novel), with EbpC (36.0%), BEB6 (13.7%), EbpA (13.7%), and D (11.4%) being the most prevalent, most clustering within zoonotic Group 1. DISCUSSION: Notably, zoonotic genotypes EbpC and EbpA were identified in chickens and geese, extending the known host range of these genotypes. Human-animal genotype sharing was observed in only one household (genotype EbpC between humans, pigs, chickens, and geese), while intraspecies circulation and occasional animal-animal genotype sharing were more common. Phylogenetic and network analyses suggested localized diversification, though single-locus ITS limits definitive evolutionary inference. E. bieneusi is highly prevalent in rural domestic animals in Heilongjiang, with genetically diverse and potentially zoonotic genotypes circulating in livestock and poultry. Although household-level human-animal transmission appears limited in this dataset, the presence of shared zoonotic genotypes highlights the need for expanded surveillance incorporating environmental sampling and multi-locus typing to clarify transmission pathways and inform One Health strategies.
PUBMED_42743159	PubMed	2026	Molecular epidemiology of pathogenic Leptospira spp. in Thailand during 2024-2025, with detection of Leptospira weilii in human clinical specimens. BACKGROUND: Leptospirosis is a significant zoonotic disease in Thailand and globally. The causative agents are the spirochete bacteria in the genus Leptospira. An updated assessment of molecular epidemiology in Thailand is needed. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Remnant EDTA blood specimens from suspected leptospirosis cases collected between June 2024 and July 2025 from the Central, Northern, Northeastern, and Southern regions of Thailand, were referred to the National Institute of Health. Demographic data were collected. Confirmed cases were diagnosed using TaqMan real-time PCR targeting LipL32 with a positively threshold of Ct 37. Partial 16S rDNA (approximately 500 bp) was sequenced using Oxford Nanopore (Oxford, UK) and analyze by BLASTn. Among 1,063 suspected cases, 34 (3.2%) were real-time PCR confirmed. The majority of the cases were male (58.8%), primarily residing in Nan province (55.9%), and most positives were from specimens collected during the rainy season (76.5%). Twenty-six of 34 sequences (76.5%) clustered with L. interrogans, and 8 of 34 (23.5%) clustered with L. weilii within the primary pathogenic (P1) clade. Re-examination with published Thai and regional datasets showed broad circulation of L. interrogans and a Northern Thailand-Lao People Democratic Republic (PDR) focus for L. weilii To our knowledge, this is the first evidence of L. weilii detected in human clinical specimens in Thailand. CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Pathogenic L. interrogans and L. weilii caused human Leptospirosis in Thailand during 2024-2025. These findings update the epidemiological status of Leptospira spp. in Thailand and can guide surveillance and control.
PUBMED_42736154	PubMed	2026	Molecular mechanisms and control strategies for the potential transmission of bacterial antibiotic resistance along the food production chain . The transmission potential of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) across the food chain constitutes a severe threat to global public health. Antibiotic overuse and misuse in intensive livestock farming drives the enrichment of antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) in animal-derived microbial communities, thereby enabling the formation of ARG dissemination networks that cover the entire food system from production to consumption. Molecular epidemiological evidence has validated the food chain as a pivotal bridge for the cross-species transmission of ARGs. Resistant bacteria and mobile genetic elements (MGEs) can cross ecological barriers via occupational exposure and dietary intake, further accelerating the evolutionary development of antibiotic resistance in clinical pathogens. Global surveillance datasets demonstrate that low-and middle-income countries (LMICs) endure higher AMR-attributable mortality, which reflects inherent systemic deficiencies in antibiotic stewardship, healthcare infrastructure, and environmental risk management. While One Health-oriented strategies have advanced AMR mitigation in recent years, persistent environmental resistance reservoirs, transboundary transmission dynamics, and inconsistent global regulatory frameworks remain major bottlenecks for effective containment. Accordingly, establishing a systematic resistome surveillance network that integrates agricultural production, food processing, and end-consumption is urgently required to support multi-sectoral, targeted, and precise AMR control.
PUBMED_42720549	PubMed	2026	Molecular pathogenesis, global epidemiological trends, and treatment strategies for pteropine orthoreoviruses: a narrative review. Pteropine orthoreoviruses are emerging bat-borne zoonotic viruses of the genus Orthoreovirus (family Reoviridae), increasingly recognized as causes of acute respiratory disease in humans. Originally grouped with the largely non-pathogenic mammalian orthoreoviruses, they have challenged that view through their association with severe influenza-like illness, evidence of human-to-human transmission, and a broad geographic range across the Old World. Maintained primarily in fruit bats of the family Pteropodidae, they are now linked to neurological as well as respiratory disease. This narrative review synthesizes current knowledge of their molecular pathogenesis, zoonotic ecology, and global epidemiology, integrating recent advances in phylogeography, reassortment-driven evolution, spillover dynamics, and translational biomedical applications within a unified One Health framework. Genomic diversity, reassortment potential, and the unique fusion-associated small transmembrane proteins together underpin viral adaptability and pathogenicity. Major gaps nonetheless remain in transmission dynamics, host adaptation, shedding ecology, and pandemic potential. Future priorities should include integrated genomic surveillance, improved diagnostic strategies, validated experimental models, and interdisciplinary One Health approaches to strengthen outbreak preparedness and prevention.
PUBMED_42694119	PubMed	2026	Motivation for physical activity participation and mindful eating in university students: a cross-sectional study using variable-centered regression and latent profile analysis. BACKGROUND: Physical activity and eating behaviors are co-occurring and often disrupted during the transition to university. Self-determination theory links motivational quality in one health behavior with self-regulation in other health behaviors. This study examined whether motivation for physical activity is associated with mindful eating among Turkish university students, whether this association differs between the awareness- and disinhibition-based facets of mindful eating, and whether motivational profiles derived from latent profile analysis differ in their associations with these facets. METHODS: A cross-sectional survey of 638 Turkish university students (aged 21.84 3.27 years; 50% female) assessed motivation for participation in physical activity using the Scale of Motivation for Participation in Physical Activity (MSPPA) and mindful eating using the 18-item Mindful Eating Questionnaire (MEQ-18). Multiple linear regression models with heteroscedasticity-consistent (type 3) (HC3) robust standard errors were used to adjust for age, sex, and body mass index category; Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate control was applied across subgroup contrasts. Common method bias was evaluated using Harman's test and a single-factor confirmatory factor analysis. Latent profile analysis of the MSPPA subscales yielded motivational profiles, which were compared across profiles using Welch's analysis of variance. RESULTS: In covariate-adjusted models, MSPPA total scores were associated with MEQ-18 total scores (B 0.145, 95% CI 0.102, 0.188 , p 0.001; R 2 0.190) and with the Awareness facet (B 0.243, 95% CI 0.167, 0.319 , p 0.001; R 2 0.143) but not with the Disinhibition facet (B -0.004, 95% CI -0.069, 0.061 , p 0.916; R 2 0.129). Low Disinhibition reliability ( 0.568) constrains inference on this null finding. Harman's test and the single-factor confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) did not support the common method bias. Coefficients were comparable across three age strata (age motivation interaction, p 0.618). Three motivational profiles differed in awareness-based ( 2 0.049) and overall ( 2 0.049) mindful eating but not in disinhibition-based eating ( 2 0.001). CONCLUSION: Higher motivation to participate in physical activity was associated with greater overall mindful eating, with the association appearing to be concentrated in the Awareness facet. Given the cross-sectional design and low Disinhibition reliability, this pattern is descriptive rather than evidence that the Awareness facet drives the overall association. The profile solution was derived within a single sample and was not externally validated. Longitudinal and mediation designs could help clarify explanatory pathways underlying these associations.
PUBMED_42728698	PubMed	2026	Multi-Marker Mitochondrial DNA Analysis Reveals Broad Vertebrate Host Use by Mansonia Mosquitoes in Baringo County, Kenya. BACKGROUND: Mosquitoes of the genus Mansonia are widely distributed in wetland ecosystems of sub-Saharan Africa and feed on humans and domestic animals, creating opportunities for zoonotic pathogen transmission. We characterized vertebrate host use by Mansonia africana and M. uniformis in Baringo County, Kenya, evaluated three mitochondrial markers for blood-meal identification, and screened blood-fed and unfed mosquitoes for detectable arboviral RNA. METHODS: Mosquito sampling was conducted at Logumgum, Sandai, and Ntepes in 2019 and 2020 using CO2-baited CDC light traps. Mansonia mosquitoes were recovered from all three sites in 2019 but only from Ntepes in 2020. Blood-fed specimens were analyzed using cytochrome b (cytb), cytochrome oxidase I (cox-1), and vertebrate 16S rRNA in 2019 (vert 16S rRNA), whereas cytb alone was applied in 2020. Blood-fed and unfed mosquitoes were screened for arboviral RNA using pan-RT-PCR assays. RESULTS: Of 802 blood-fed mosquitoes analyzed in 2019, host-identification success was highest with cytb (87.9%), followed by cox-1 (20.3%) and vert 16S rRNA (5.5%). The additional loci increased overall host resolution by approximately 12% beyond cytb alone. In the 2019 cytb-based dataset, human DNA was detected in 61.8% of identified blood meals when mixed human-animal feeds were included. Separately, 63 of 69 identified blood meals (91.3%) from Ntepes in 2020 were goat-derived. Ma. africana and Ma. uniformis exhibited overlapping host-use profiles. No arboviral RNA was detected. CONCLUSIONS: Ma. africana and Ma. uniformis in Baringo County fed on humans, livestock, rodents, and other vertebrates and showed broadly overlapping host-use profiles. Cytb provided the highest blood-meal identification success, while cox-1 and vert 16S rRNA resolved additional meals, supporting the complementary value of a multilocus approach. Feeding across the human-livestock interface identifies potential exposure pathways supporting the continued inclusion of both species in integrated entomological and One Health surveillance.
PUBMED_42761089	PubMed	2026	Multi-omics characterization of a rhizosphere-derived Bacillus cereus CBS-B5 strain reveals genomic stability, metabolic versatility, and biosafety-related genomic features for agricultural applications. INTRODUCTION: Bacillus cereus strains have potential plant growth-promoting properties but may harbor virulence and antimicrobial resistance (AMR) determinants. This study characterized the rhizosphere-derived B. cereus CBS-B5 strain to assess its functional potential and biosafety-related features. METHODS: CBS-B5, isolated from sugar beet rhizosphere, was characterized using an integrated multi-omics approach combining phenotypic assays, whole-genome sequencing, phylogenomic and comparative genomic analyses, and metabolomic profiling. RESULTS: CBS-B5 exhibited visible growth under elevated salinity conditions, demonstrated recovery following heat stress exposure, and strong biofilm formation, but no detectable phosphate solubilization. Whole-genome sequencing revealed a 5.02 Mb genome with 35% GC content, 100% completeness, and 0.03% contamination. Phylogenomic analysis placed CBS-B5 within the B. cereus group. Comparative genomic and functional analyses indicated genomic stability, metabolic versatility, stress-adaptation potential, and diverse biosynthetic gene clusters. Genome plasticity was supported by the presence of mobile genetic elements and horizontal gene transfer events affecting approximately 16% of the proteome. Metabolomic analysis confirmed active metabolic processes, including nitrogen recycling, osmoprotection, and transformation of plant-derived compounds under laboratory conditions. Although virulence-associated genes, including nheABC, cytK, and inhA, and -hemolytic activity were detected, AMR and virulence determinants showed limited potential for horizontal dissemination. Similarly, AMR genes exhibited low mobility potential and minimal phenotypic resistance beyond intrinsic traits. DISCUSSION: Overall, CBS-B5 combines genomic stability, metabolic flexibility, and ecological adaptability. From a One Health perspective, the genomic analyses suggest a limited potential for horizontal dissemination of antimicrobial resistance and virulence determinants. However, the presence of chromosomally encoded toxin-associated genes and -hemolytic activity indicates that additional biosafety evaluation is required before agricultural application.
PUBMED_42743804	PubMed	2026	Multi-omics evidence reveals robust airborne-human resistome connectivity driven by high-risk ARGs and mediated by Staphylococcus. Airborne microbiomes are considered an important source of human antimicrobial resistance (AMR) exposure, yet multi-omics evidence linking airborne and human nasal resistomes remains limited. Here, we integrated metagenomic sequencing and whole-genome sequencing of antibiotic-resistant Staphylococcus isolates to investigate the connectivity between air and human nasal resistomes in dairy farm environments. Metagenomic taxonomic profiling showed that Staphylococcus was prominent in total suspended particles (TSP) and consistently detected across all samples. Among environmental reservoirs, TSP resistomes exhibited the strongest similarity to human nasal resistomes. This connectivity was supported by multiple lines of evidence, including highly similar resistome profiles, extensive homologous antibiotic resistance gene (ARG) pairs, strain-level similarity of resistant Staphylococcus isolates, and conserved mobile ARG genetic contexts. Notably, this connectivity was primarily driven by high-risk ARGs, while Staphylococcus was frequently associated with mobile ARGs and represented the only shared pathogenic genomes carrying both ARGs and virulence factor genes between airborne and nasal samples. Although lower ARG diversity, nasal resistomes exhibited higher ARG burden, risk scores, antibiotic-resistant bacterial genome abundance, and prevalence of resistant Staphylococcus. Occupational exposure further increased total and high-risk ARG burdens among farm workers. Together, these findings indicate that TSP can serve as an important route of occupational AMR exposure, with high-risk ARGs and Staphylococcus contributing to connectivity between airborne and nasal resistomes. Incorporating the host microbiome may therefore provide a more complete assessment of human-associated AMR exposure within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42764359	PubMed	2026	Multidrug resistance, biofilm formation, and pathotype diversity of Escherichia coli isolated from diarrheic lambs in intensive sheep farms, Aksu, Xinjiang, China. BACKGROUND: Under the One Health framework, the antimicrobial resistance and pathogenicity of Escherichia coli isolated from diarrheic lambs pose a potential threat to public health security. Aksu in Xinjiang is a major intensive mutton sheep breeding base in China. This study aimed to investigate the antimicrobial resistance, virulence gene carriage, biofilm-forming ability, pathotype distribution and phylogenetic group characteristics of E. coli from diarrheic lambs in this region, and analyze their potential correlations. METHODS: A total of 150 samples were collected from diarrheic lambs in 6 intensive mutton sheep farms. E. coli was isolated and identified via differential media and specific gene detection; the disk diffusion method was used for antimicrobial susceptibility testing. PCR was performed to detect resistance and virulence gene carriage, and E. coli pathotypes were determined based on molecular characteristics. Mouse challenge assay was adopted to evaluate bacterial pathogenicity, crystal violet staining to assess biofilm-forming ability, and PCR to conduct phylogenetic group typing. RESULTS: A total of 121 E. coli strains were isolated with an isolation rate of 80.7%, including 38.0% multidrug-resistant (MDR) strains and 49.6% pathogenic strains (5 single pathotypes and 7 hybrid pathotypes). Mouse models showed all tested pathogenic strains had pathogenicity. Phylogenetic group analysis showed that group B1 was the predominant phylogroup (76.0%). Moreover, 78.6% of the strains had biofilm-forming ability, and MDR strains exhibited significantly higher biofilm-forming ability than non-MDR strains. The isolated strains harbored abundant resistance and virulence genes, with 13 different types of resistance genes and 18 virulence genes with distinct functions detected in total. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first systematic report on the diversity characteristics of pathogenic E. coli from diarrheic lambs in intensive sheep farms in Aksu, clarifying the phylogenetic and antimicrobial resistance characteristics of the strains and revealing a significant association between biofilm formation and bacterial resistance. These findings provide a basis for the coordinated management of cross-domain public health risks in underdeveloped regions under the One Health framework, and contribute to the sustainable development of the mutton sheep industry and the safeguard of public health security.
PUBMED_42700875	PubMed	2026	Multidrug-resistant Staphylococcus aureus from raw bovine milk in Haryana, India: Resistance determinants, virulence factors and dissemination potential. This present study investigated antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and virulence in Staphylococcus aureus isolated from raw bovine milk collected from unorganized dairy farms in Haryana, India. A total 121 S. aureus strains from 153 raw milk samples were confirmed by PCR targeting the nuc gene and further screened for antimicrobial susceptibility. These isolates exhibited the predominant resistance against oxacillin (80.16%) followed by cefoxitin (60.33%), with lower resistance to tetracycline (14.04%) and gentamicin (3.30%). Among these resistant isolates, 40.5% were classified as multidrug-resistant (MDR), while 66.7% exhibited a multiple antibiotic resistance (MAR) index 0.2. The MIC testing demonstrated that 75.9% of isolates were vancomycin resistant (MIC 16 g/mL). Further, Genotypic characterization identified methicillin resistance genes, with mecA detected in 89.2% and mecC in 10.8% of S. aureus isolates. Similarly, resistant determinants were found at high frequencies in isolates such as tetracycline resistance genes (tetM, 76.5%; tetK, 23.5%), macrolide resistance genes (ermC, 62.5%; ermB, 37.5%) while ermA was absent. The aminoglycoside resistance gene aacA-aphD was detected in 5.8% of isolates. Additionally, S. aureus isolates showed presence of virulence determinants such as coa (72.7%), luk-PV (15.7%), icaA/icaD (42.1%) and enterotoxin genes sec (39.6%), sed (34.7%) and sea (5.8%) while seb was not deteceted. Mobile genetic elements (MGEs), notably Tn916 was detected in 66.7%, class 1 integrons in 41.7% isolates and staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec (SCCmec) type IV among methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Overall, these findings highlight a high prevalence of AMR, virulence-associated genes and transmissible resistance elements in dairy-derived S. aureus, emphasizing the need for continuous surveillance and strengthened One Health strategies to limit the spread of resistant and potentially pathogenic strains.
PUBMED_42754890	PubMed	2026	Multilocus Oxford Nanopore sequencing reveals genetic diversity of Giardia duodenalis and Cryptosporidium spp. in surface and wastewater in Southwestern Colombia. BACKGROUND: Giardia duodenalis and Cryptosporidium spp. are globally significant enteric protozoa responsible for waterborne diarrheal disease with important public health and zoonotic implications. Conventional genotyping approaches based on Sanger sequencing frequently underestimate mixed infections and minority variants, limiting the resolution of environmental molecular surveillance. This study aimed to characterize the presence and genetic diversity of both pathogens in surface water and wastewater samples from the R o Pasto basin (Nari o, southwestern Colombia) using a multilocus amplicon-based Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) sequencing strategy. METHODS: A total of 102 water samples were collected over seven months (August 2022-March 2023) from three surface water sites representing the upper, middle, and lower R o Pasto basin, and one wastewater collection point. Novel primers targeting the Cryptosporidium 18S rRNA gene were designed and validated alongside previously published primer sets for three G. duodenalis loci (glutamate dehydrogenase, triose phosphate isomerase, beta giardin). PCR-positive amplicons were sequenced on a MinION Mk1C device for 72 h. Reads were quality-filtered (Q 10) and taxonomically assigned using Centrifuge against curated reference databases; assignments were considered valid at 1000 reads per taxon per sample. RESULTS: For G. duodenalis, 49 of 102 samples (48.0%) produced at least one PCR-positive amplicon. Successful taxonomic assignment after ONT sequencing and quality filtering was achieved in 26/32 (81.3%), 35/40 (87.5%), and 27/33 (81.8%) samples for the bg, gdh, and tpi loci, respectively. In surface water, assemblage A predominated across loci mean relative read abundance: 80.7% (bg), 53.8% (gdh) ; in wastewater, assemblage B was more prevalent at the gdh locus (mean 51.5%) while assemblage A remained dominant at bg (mean 66.7%). Assemblages C-E were detected at low relative abundances, predominantly via gdh. At the sub-assemblage level, AII was the most consistently dominant lineage across both matrices and loci; co-occurrence of multiple sub-assemblages within a single sample was detected in subsets of samples across all three markers. For Cryptosporidium spp., 67 of 102 samples (65.7%) were PCR-positive, of which 49 (73.1%) yielded valid species-level assignments. C. parvum was the most abundant species (mean relative read abundance: 40.2% in surface water, 32.9% in wastewater), followed by C. andersoni and C. canis. Co-detection of two or more species within a single sample was observed in 47 of 49 assigned samples (95.9%), most frequently involving the combination of C. parvum, C. andersoni, and C. canis (36.7%); this high co-detection rate may partly reflect the limited taxonomic resolution of single-locus 18S rRNA genotyping combined with the sensitivity of high-depth long-read sequencing, and should be interpreted with caution. Concurrent detection of at least one Cryptosporidium species and at least one G. duodenalis assemblage was observed in 27 of 69 assigned samples (39.1%). CONCLUSIONS: The integration of newly designed primers with multilocus ONT amplicon sequencing provides improved resolution for detecting co-occurring genotypes and species of waterborne protozoa in complex environmental matrices compared to conventional single-locus Sanger approaches. These findings document broad circulation of diverse G. duodenalis assemblages and Cryptosporidium species in the R o Pasto basin, contributing to the genomic surveillance of these pathogens in Latin America. The presence and genetic diversity data reported here may support water quality monitoring and inform risk management strategies under a One Health framework; however, conclusions regarding quantitative exposure risk require complementary data on parasite viability and concentration.
PUBMED_42693940	PubMed	2026	Multiple Strains of Trichomonas gallinae are Widespread in Reservoir Hosts and Environmental Resources in UK Farmland. Understanding transmission routes of parasites and pathogens is critical for the development of control measures and mitigation of impacts on host populations. Trichomonas gallinae is a widespread parasite in columbids worldwide, and has emerged as a lethal disease in passerines, particularly finches. The postulated transmission route from columbids to passerines via spillover at shared resources has not yet been empirically tested. Here, we screen 363 birds (261 columbids and 102 non-columbids) in the UK and France for the presence and strain identity of T. gallinae. To quantify potential environmental transmission, we also screened 51 food and water resources common in farmland, at 12 sites over a 2-year period. We isolated T. gallinae parasites from 79% of columbids, 36% of non-columbids, and 39% of environmental resources. Prevalence of the Type A strain was more than double in birds sampled at fed sites compared to those at unfed sites. Strain composition was mirrored in columbids, passerines, and shared food and water resources, providing compelling evidence that T. gallinae, especially the Type A strain, is transmitted via these shared resources. T. gallinae was isolated from high density feeding resources (where supplementary food was provided) nearly three times as often as low density resources (natural areas of seed-providing vegetation), meaning that careful management of supplementary resources has the potential to reduce T. gallinae prevalence in wild bird populations. Further work needs to test practical means of achieving this, but ensuring any supplementary feeding is provided at low density is likely to be critical to reducing parasite transmission.
PUBMED_42678812	PubMed	2026	Mycobacterial vaccination of fish and human tuberculin skin test reactivity: a testable One Health interface. Screening with tuberculin remains widely used in humans and livestock for detecting mycobacterial immune sensitization, but tuberculin skin test (TST) interpretation is influenced by Bacillus Calmette-Gu rin vaccination, environmental non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM), cutoff selection, and epidemiological context. The TST uses purified protein derivative (PPD), a complex mycobacterial antigen preparation, to elicit delayed-type hypersensitivity measured as local skin induration. Aquaculture vaccination is established for farmed fish, whereas vaccines targeting fish mycobacteriosis remain largely experimental, including BCG, attenuated or heat-inactivated mycobacteria, DNA vaccines, mycolic acids, and defined antigen combinations. This Perspective asks whether experimental mycobacterial vaccination of fish could plausibly influence human TST interpretation in occupationally exposed aquaculture workers. Such an interaction would require antigenic overlap with PPD, environmental release or persistence of mycobacterial material linked to vaccination, repeated worker exposure through water, biofilms, fish tissues, surfaces, or skin microtrauma, immune sensitization or amplification, and an induration shift sufficient to alter classification at operational cutoffs. The article defines this as a testable One Health interface and proposes construct-level antigen mapping, environmental monitoring around vaccination events, and prospective worker studies using continuous TST measurement with parallel IGRA testing.
PUBMED_42692179	PubMed	2026	Mycoplasma and Bartonella in cats from the tropical tourist Gili Islands, Indonesia. Bartonella spp. and haemotropic Mycoplasma spp. are important vector-borne bacteria of veterinary and zoonotic relevance, yet information on their circulation in Indonesian island ecosystems remains limited. We investigated their occurrence and molecular diversity in 117 domestic and free-roaming cats from the Gili Islands, Indonesia, using full-length 16S rRNA nanopore metagenomics followed by targeted PCR, sequencing, phylogenetic analysis and multilocus sequence typing (MLST). Bartonella DNA was detected in 18/117 (15.4%) cats and haemotropic Mycoplasma DNA in 40/117 (34.2%). Sequence analysis identified Bartonella henselae as the predominant species together with Bartonella clarridgeiae. MLST of B. henselae revealed three sequence types (ST1, ST16 and ST42), with ST1, a lineage reported in both feline and human isolates, predominating. Comparison with the PubMLST database showed significant geographical differences in the distribution of ST1 and ST42, supporting regional variation in the circulation of B. henselae lineages. Haemoplasma characterization identified Candidatus Mycoplasma haemominutum, Mycoplasma haemofelis, Candidatus Mycoplasma turicensis and a Mycoplasma feliminutum-like organism, comprising ten distinct sequence variants. Haemoplasma positivity was significantly associated with age, with adults showing higher positivity than younger animals (P 0.001), whereas Bartonella infection was not associated with age, sex or island of origin. The detection of zoonotically relevant B. henselae lineages and the genetic diversity of feline haemoplasmas provide evidence of the circulation of vector-borne bacteria among cats in this tropical island ecosystem. These findings provide the first molecular epidemiological baseline for this region and contribute to understanding the circulation and genetic diversity of feline vector-borne pathogens in Southeast Asia.
PUBMED_42785449	PubMed	2026	Mycotoxins as Environmental Pollutants: Epigenetic Modifications in Animals and Implications for Ecosystem Health. Mycotoxins are widespread environmental contaminants whose global prevalence and ecological impacts are intensifying due to climate change. However, their sublethal effects on wildlife populations and ecosystem stability remain significantly underexplored. Laboratory studies have demonstrated that mycotoxins induce epigenetic toxicity, but the implications of these molecular findings for populations and ecosystems are not yet fully understood. This review synthesizes current knowledge regarding mycotoxin-induced epigenetic modifications and evaluates their effects across multiple levels of biological organization. Mycotoxins can induce intergenerational effects in model organisms, but true transgenerational inheritance remains less established in mammals. These heritable epigenetic modifications could propagate from individuals to populations, potentially affecting food webs, biodiversity, and ecosystem services, although these outcomes remain largely hypothetical. To address these knowledge gaps, we propose an epigenetics-informed risk assessment framework that incorporates early-warning epigenetic biomarkers, accounts for both intergenerational and transgenerational effects, integrates multi-stressor interactions, and evaluates ecosystem-level responses under climate change scenarios. Implementing this framework will depend on field-deployable detection methods, enzyme-based bioremediation strategies, and climate-adaptive management under a One Health approach. This review highlights the urgent need for interdisciplinary collaboration to address mycotoxin-induced epigenetic damage, which poses a potential threat to ecosystem integrity. However, the ecological consequences of these effects remain hypothetical and require further investigation.
PUBMED_42717629	PubMed	2026	Nanoparticle-Based Vaccines Against Toxoplasma gondii: Immunological Rationale, Platform Strategies, and Translational Challenges. Toxoplasma gondii is a widely distributed zoonotic pathogen with detrimental impacts on both human health and livestock production. No vaccine is available for humans, and the only licensed veterinary vaccine, Toxovax, has limitations related to safety, stability, and large-scale production. In this review, we analyze nanoparticle platforms, including PLGA, chitosan, lipid nanoparticles, calcium phosphate nanoparticles, virus-like particles, and porous delivery systems, in relation to antigen uptake and MHC-I/MHC-II presentation, Th1-polarized cellular immunity, and mucosal vaccination. We also consider how antigen selection, carrier properties, route of administration, and host species influence immune responses and protection. Available studies show that different antigens may perform differently within the same platform and that the same antigen may induce different outcomes when delivered by different carriers. From a One Health perspective, feline vaccination may reduce environmental oocyst contamination, whereas livestock vaccination may reduce tissue cysts and food-borne transmission. Although parenteral mRNA-LNP vaccines have reduced chronic-stage parasite burdens in mice, direct evidence that they induce intestinal mucosal immunity remains limited. Key translational issues include validation in nonrodent hosts, chronic-stage and mucosal endpoints, manufacturing scalability, and regulatory approval. Nanoparticle vaccines remain promising, but their successful development will require closer matching of antigen, platform, administration route, and target host.
PUBMED_42700198	PubMed	2026	Nanoplastics in environmental biota: analytical challenges, tissue translocation, and biomarkers for biomonitoring. Nanoplastics are increasingly recognised as relevant contaminants in environmental biota, yet their integration into biomonitoring remains limited by analytical and interpretative uncertainties. This review critically examines nanoplastic detection in biological matrices, evidence of uptake and tissue distribution, and biomarkers of early biological effects. Although experimental studies suggest that model nanoplastics may reach internal tissues, quantitative confirmation of intact-particle translocation remains limited, and fluorescence-based findings may be affected by dye leaching, tissue autofluorescence, external particle association, and insufficient chemical confirmation. Oxidative stress, immune and inflammatory responses, genotoxicity, and metabolic disturbances are frequently reported across taxa, but their low specificity limits their use as stand-alone indicators. We therefore outline a tiered conceptual approach for future biomonitoring, integrating the following: (i) polymer-specific particle confirmation, (ii) assessment of internal burden using complementary mass-, number-, and size-based metrics, and (iii) interpretation through mechanistically linked multi-biomarker panels. This approach distinguishes environmental occurrence from internal exposure and biological effect and highlights the need for contamination control, complementary analytical methods, environmentally relevant exposure conditions, and transparent uncertainty reporting. Nanoplastics are not yet ready for routine biomonitoring, but coordinated analytical validation and mechanism-based interpretation may support their future inclusion in environmental monitoring and risk assessment.
PUBMED_42752209	PubMed	2026	Nanopore sequencing in infectious disease diagnostics and surveillance. The global burden of infectious disease is on the rise, driven by antibiotic resistance, emerging pathogens, and gaps in accessible, decentralized diagnostics. To address these demands, there is a need for the development of diagnostic platforms for detection, surveillance, or monitoring assays with quick turnaround times. Oxford Nanopore sequencing, a platform for real-time long-read third-generation sequencing, has emerged as a promising tool in this space, with the ability to detect a wide range of molecular targets, including DNA, RNA, proteins, and base modifications. Its unique advantages, including portability, scalability, and the capacity for culture-independent workflows, combined with the depth of sequencing data produced, make it especially well-suited for infectious disease diagnostics and surveillance in both clinical and field settings. In this review, we aim to critically examine recent advances in the application of nanopore sequencing for diagnosing infectious diseases caused by bacterial, viral, fungal, and parasitic agents, as well as for detecting antimicrobial resistance genes. We also compare its potential advantages over conventional diagnostic methods and explore its expanding role in tracking outbreaks, monitoring pathogens in the environment, and detecting spillover events from animals to humans. Together, these applications highlight the relevance and position of this novel technology as a tool of choice for translational medical research and clinicians in the fight against infectious diseases and for global health preparedness.
PUBMED_42676396	PubMed	2026	Nanotechnology-Driven Strategies to Combat Antimicrobial Resistance in the One Health Era. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) has emerged as one of the greatest global public health threats, compromising the effectiveness of antibiotics and jeopardizing advances in modern medicine. The extensive use and misuse of antimicrobial agents in human medicine, veterinary practice, agriculture, and aquaculture have accelerated the emergence and spread of multidrug-resistant microorganisms. Because resistant pathogens, antibiotic residues, and resistance genes continuously circulate among humans, animals, and the environment, AMR is now recognized as a complex One Health challenge requiring coordinated, multidisciplinary solutions. However, conventional strategies, including the development of new antibiotics and antimicrobial stewardship programs, are increasingly constrained by rapid microbial adaptation, biofilm formation, delayed diagnosis, and the declining antibiotic discovery pipeline. Nanotechnology has emerged as a promising interdisciplinary platform capable of addressing several limitations of conventional antimicrobial approaches. Nanomaterials possess intrinsic broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity, enhance targeted drug delivery, improve biofilm eradication, and enable rapid pathogen detection through advanced nanodiagnostic systems. Furthermore, integrating nanotechnology with artificial intelligence, machine learning, and smart biosensing technologies is accelerating the development of precision antimicrobial therapies and real-time AMR surveillance systems. This review discusses the AMR crisis from a One Health perspective and summarizes recent advances in antimicrobial nanomaterials, nanodrug delivery systems, antibiofilm strategies, and nanodiagnostics. Current translational challenges and future perspectives are also highlighted, emphasizing the potential of nanotechnology to support sustainable AMR management across interconnected human, animal, and environmental sectors.
PUBMED_42744253	PubMed	2026	National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System: Three Decades of Advancing Public Health Through Integrated Surveillance of Antimicrobial Resistance. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) occurs when bacteria and other microorganisms adapt in ways that make medicines less effective, causing infections that are harder to treat and more likely to spread. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), AMR infections affect millions of Americans each year and contribute to thousands of deaths (CDC, 2019). After three decades of operation, the U.S. National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System (NARMS) stands as a model of sustained, collaborative public health surveillance. What began in 1996 as an effort to track resistance in Salmonella and E. coli O157 has evolved into a One Health surveillance network monitoring AMR across the farm-to-fork continuum. Through a partnership among CDC, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), state and local health departments, and universities, NARMS has become the backbone of foodborne AMR surveillance in the United States. The past decade has been particularly transformative. NARMS explored new sampling to include companion animals, minor livestock, aquaculture, surface water, and wildlife. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) revolutionized the program's capabilities, enabling timely identification of emerging pathogens and revealing how resistance genes spread. Near real-time public dashboards make NARMS data accessible to researchers, clinicians, regulators, and policymakers. NARMS data shape decisions about new animal drug approvals, guide stewardship programs, and inform clinical treatment guidelines nationwide. As NARMS enters its fourth decade with a 2026-2030 strategic plan, the program will leverage artificial intelligence and metagenomics while expanding surveillance to fill remaining gaps ensuring this vital system continues to protect the food supply and both human and animal health from AMR.
PUBMED_42732490	PubMed	2026	Nipah virus in the era of global connectivity: molecular evolution, transmission risk, and preparedness strategies. Nipah virus (NiV) is a highly pathogenic zoonotic RNA virus belonging to the genus Henipavirus within the family Paramyxoviridae, representing a continuing global health concern due to its high case fatality rate and potential for epidemic expansion in the era of increasing international connectivity. The virus demonstrates strong evolutionary adaptability driven by the absence of proofreading mechanisms during RNA replication, enabling genetic diversification that may influence host range, virulence, and transmission dynamics. Molecular pathogenesis of NiV is primarily mediated through interaction of viral glycoproteins with ephrin-B2 and ephrin-B3 receptors, facilitating host cell entry, endothelial damage, and neuroinvasion. Immune evasion facilitated by the action of accessory proteins encoded by the P gene (P, V, W, and C) acts to suppress innate antiviral immunity through the inhibition of interferon induction and JAK/STAT signaling. Human-to-human transmission of Nipah virus remains limited, with epidemiological evidence indicating basic reproduction numbers generally below unity; however, respiratory involvement and healthcare-associated exposure may enhance cluster outbreaks. Global travel, ecological disruption, and fragmented surveillance systems contribute to spillover risk, particularly in South and Southeast Asia where fruit bats of the genus Pteropus serve as natural reservoirs. Despite advances in vaccine technology, including subunit, viral vector, mRNA-based platforms, and monoclonal antibody therapies, no licensed prophylactic or therapeutic agent is currently available for human use. Global preparedness remains challenged by the scarcity of high-containment biosafety facilities, limited research funding, and absence of integrated One Health surveillance networks. Ethical considerations surrounding wildlife population control further complicate disease mitigation strategies. Emerging genomic surveillance, artificial intelligence-assisted predictive modeling, and regional data-sharing frameworks are essential for early detection and response. Strengthening molecular research on viral-host interactions and transmission determinants will be critical for preventing future Nipah virus outbreaks in an increasingly interconnected world.
PUBMED_42674244	PubMed	2026	Nipah virus: an exceptionally virulent emerging zoonotic pathogen. Nipah virus (NiV) is a highly lethal zoonotic paramyxovirus harbored by fruit bats (Pteropodidae). The virus spreads through zoonotic spillover via intermediate animal hosts or contaminated environments, and through human-to-human transmission. Since its emergence in 1998, NiV has triggered recurrent outbreaks across South and Southeast Asia, with case-fatality rates of 40-75%. Two genotypes (NiV-M and NiV-B) differ in transmissibility and pathogenicity. WHO-listed as a priority pathogen, NiV has no approved vaccines or antiviral therapeutics. The virus gains entry into host cells through Ephrin-B2/B3 receptors, and evades innate immunity via non-structural proteins (V, W, C) and structural proteins. These evasion strategies disrupt multiple nodes in type I and II interferon (IFN-I/II) signaling pathways, including suppression of RIG-I/MAVS and inhibition of STAT1/STAT2 nuclear translocation, and dysregulation of NF- B activation. Finally, these mechanisms facilitate viral replication and systemic dissemination. Infection also elicits adaptive immunity, including neutralizing antibodies against viral glycoproteins (G and F) and durable virus-specific CD4 and CD8 T-cell responses. Fatal outcomes correlate with high early viremia, delayed or insufficient antibody production, and dysregulated innate and adaptive immunity. In affected organs, particularly the brain, persistent cytokine storm driven predominantly by CXCL10 recruits inflammatory infiltrates and amplifies immunopathological damage. Current intervention strategies include vaccine candidates (ChAdOx1 Nipah B, mRNA-1215, HeV-sG) and antiviral approaches such as nucleoside analogs, monoclonal antibodies, and fusion inhibitors. This review comprehensively synthesizes current knowledge on NiV epidemiology, pathogenesis, and countermeasure development, providing a conceptual framework to interpret its exceptional virulence and prioritize targets for effective outbreak control.
PUBMED_42701063	PubMed	2026	Nurses' Experiences of Caring for Children with Cancer: A Descriptive Phenomenological Study. OBJECTIVES: To describe the essential structure of pediatric oncology nurses' lived experience of caring for children with cancer and to clarify how emotional involvement, professional meaning, contextual constraints, and personal-life spillover are integrated in that experience. METHODS: A descriptive phenomenological study guided by Giorgi's approach was conducted with 11 pediatric oncology nurses from a specialized oncology hospital and a central hospital in Northern Portugal. Data were collected through face-to-face semistructured interviews and analyzed using Giorgi's four-step procedure. Interviews and analysis were conducted in Portuguese; quotations selected for publication were translated into English and checked for conceptual and semantic equivalence. RESULTS: The essential structure of the experience was sustained relational presence under emotional and contextual pressure. Nurses remained affectively close enough to preserve trust with children and families while regulating distress to remain clinically and professionally available. Four interrelated constituents expressed this structure: emotional ambivalence in the nurse-child-family relationship; meaning-making and professional confirmation; practice demands and contextual constraints; and self-regulation and personal-life spillover. CONCLUSIONS: Caring for children with cancer was experienced as a continuous balancing of relational closeness, professional responsibility, organizational limitations, and personal vulnerability. These findings suggest that the quality and sustainability of relational care depend not only on nurses' individual self-regulation but also on supportive organizational conditions. IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING PRACTICE: Pediatric oncology services should provide structured reflective debriefings after emotionally difficult events, simulation-based training for complex communication with children and families, and confidential peer and psychological support. Adequate staffing, protected time for communication, and team routines that support continuity and shared reflection may help nurses sustain relationally responsive care.
PUBMED_42778310	PubMed	2026	Nursing interventions for people with systemic lupus erythematosus: a systematic review. BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic, multisystem autoimmune disease characterised by diverse clinical manifestations that require multidisciplinary care. Across diverse care settings, nurses play a central role in supporting patients through education, psychosocial support and self-management strategies. However, evidence on nurse-led interventions and their effects on health outcomes in people with SLE remains fragmented. OBJECTIVES: This systematic review aimed to synthesise existing evidence on nurse-led interventions for adults with SLE and their effects on health outcomes. METHODS: We systematically searched CINAHL, PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Trip Database and the Cochrane Library in July 2026, with additional searches of Google Scholar. Eligible studies included adults with SLE, evaluated nurse-led interventions and reported at least one health outcome. Quantitative intervention studies published in English or French between 2016 and 2026 were included. Methodological quality was assessed using the Joanna Briggs Institute critical appraisal tools. Data were extracted on study characteristics, interventions and health outcomes. Due to heterogeneity in study design, interventions and outcomes, a narrative synthesis was conducted. RESULTS: Twenty-four studies were included. Nurse-led interventions primarily focused on therapeutic education and self-management, psychological and psychoeducational support, and lifestyle and self-care interventions. Improvements were most consistently reported in SLE-related knowledge and self-management and quality of life, with additional benefits reported for fatigue, pain and psychological outcomes. CONCLUSION: Nurse-led interventions may improve several health outcomes in adults with SLE, particularly SLE-related knowledge, self-management and quality of life. However, heterogeneity across interventions and outcomes, together with methodological limitations and risk of bias, limits the certainty of the evidence. Further research is needed to strengthen the evidence on the effectiveness of nurse-led interventions in adults with SLE through rigorous study designs and longer follow-up.
PUBMED_42772036	PubMed	2026	Nursing-related time toxicity: An evolutionary concept analysis. BACKGROUND: Time toxicity has been used in cancer care to describe the time patients lose to treatment and healthcare-related activities. In nursing work, time-related problems have been described across several areas, including documentation burden, electronic health record use, non-nursing tasks, low-value care, time pressure, missed nursing care and recovery loss. However, these phenomena have not been integrated into a coherent nursing concept. OBJECTIVE: To clarify the concept of nursing-related time toxicity by identifying its surrogate terms, related concepts, defining attributes, antecedents, consequences, empirical referents and contextual features. DESIGN: An evolutionary concept analysis. DATA SOURCES: Six databases were searched from May to June 2026: PubMed, CINAHL, Web of Science, Embase, China National Knowledge Infrastructure and Wanfang Data. REVIEW METHODS: Rodgers' evolutionary method guided the analysis. Records were screened against predefined eligibility criteria. Articles were included if they focused on nursing work and provided substantive conceptual information on time-related or task-related phenomena. Data were extracted using a structured form and analyzed through iterative qualitative coding and constant comparison within and across studies. RESULTS: Twenty-three studies published between 2009 and 2026 were included. The term nursing-related time toxicity was not used in the included studies, but the phenomenon was represented through surrogate and related terms such as documentation burden, electronic health record burden, non-nursing tasks, low-value nursing care, time pressure, care left undone, missed nursing care, implicit rationing and missed breaks. Five defining attributes were identified: low-value or non-nursing time occupation, documentation and electronic health record-mediated time consumption, direct care and interaction displacement, time pressure, scarcity and prioritization, and recovery and temporal spillover loss. Antecedents included organizational and workforce conditions, technological conditions, role misalignment and regulatory demands, and clinical care demands. Consequences included unfinished or omitted care, risks to patient safety and care continuity, nurse well-being and occupational consequences, and organizational and workflow consequences. CONCLUSIONS: Nursing-related time toxicity is an emerging concept that captures harmful patterns of time use in nursing work. It is distinct from general workload, time pressure, documentation burden, missed care and burnout, although it overlaps with each. The proposed definition and conceptual model provide a foundation for future measurement, empirical testing and organizational interventions aimed at protecting professional nursing time.
PUBMED_42703886	PubMed	2026	Occupational pesticide exposure and multidimensional risk perception among family farmers: implications for One health. Pesticide use represents an important One Health challenge due to its interconnected effects on human health, environmental quality, and food production systems. This study evaluated occupational exposure to pesticides and multidimensional risk perception among family onion farmers in southern Brazil. A cross-sectional study was conducted with 89 farmers from S o Jos do Norte, Rio Grande do Sul, using a structured questionnaire addressing sociodemographic characteristics, occupational practices, pesticide use, personal protective equipment (PPE), health conditions, and perceptions of risks related to environmental contamination, human and animal health, food quality, and occupational exposure. Most participants were male (75.3%), older than 40 years (78.6%), and reported year-round agricultural activity (85.4%). Herbicides were the most frequently used pesticides, and several fungicides and insecticides were applied at doses exceeding the recommended levels. Although environmental risk perception was relatively high, particularly regarding water contamination, adherence to PPE remained low, with 83.1% reporting inadequate use. Musculoskeletal, dermatological, and neuropsychological symptoms were commonly reported. Younger farmers demonstrated higher environmental risk perception, while married individuals and those with prolonged occupational exposure generally showed lower perception levels. Conversely, chronic conditions such as pulmonar and cardiovascular diseases, and cancer were associated with increased risk perception. The findings suggest that repeated occupational exposure may contribute to the normalization of hazardous practices, reducing awareness of pesticide-related risks. From a One Health perspective, the results highlight the need for integrated interventions involving occupational health surveillance, environmental monitoring, health education, and the promotion of safer and more sustainable agricultural practices in rural communities.
PUBMED_42761972	PubMed	2026	Occurrence and Antimicrobial Resistance Profiles of Escherichia coli along the Sheep Meat Production Chain: A One Health Approach. BACKGROUND: Antimicrobial-resistant foodborne bacteria circulating among animals, humans, and the environment pose a significant threat to public health worldwide. OBJECTIVE: This study investigated the occurrence and antimicrobial resistance profiles of E. coli along the sheep meat production chain using a One Health approach. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 224 samples were collected over a six-month period from sheep farms and meat processing environments. Isolation and confirmation of E. coli were performed using standard microbiological methods, and confirmed isolates were subjected to antimicrobial susceptibility testing against ten commonly used antibiotics. RESULTS: Overall, E. coli was detected in 35.7% (80/224) of the samples, with a significantly higher (P 0.018) occurrence in processing environments (42.9%, 48/112) than on farms (28.6%, 32/112). On farms, the occurrence of E. coli ranged from 0 to 81.3%, with faecal samples recording the highest prevalence, while no isolates were recovered from feed obtained from bulk storage. In processing environments, occurrence ranged from 12.5 to 68.8%, with processors' hand swabs exhibiting the highest contamination level and processing table swabs recording the lowest. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing revealed that farm-derived E. coli isolates exhibited the highest resistance to amoxicillin (57.7%) but remained highly susceptible ( 95) to chloramphenicol and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim. In contrast, isolates from processing environments showed the highest resistance to tetracycline (60.5%) and highest susceptibility to chloramphenicol (76.3%). Multiple antibiotic resistance (MAR) indices ranged from 0.0 to 0.7 among farm isolates and from 0.0 to 0.8 among isolates from processing environments, indicating varying levels of antimicrobial exposure and selection pressure along the production chain. CONCLUSION: The findings demonstrate that E. coli contamination occurs at multiple points along the sheep meat production chain, with processing environments serving as potential reservoirs for antimicrobial-resistant strains. The detection of multidrug-resistant E. coli across animal, human, and environmental interfaces highlights the interconnected nature of antimicrobial resistance and underscores the importance of the One Health approach in surveillance and control efforts. RECOMMENDATION: Strengthening hygiene and sanitation practices, together with promoting prudent antimicrobial use are essential to reducing the risk of foodborne infections and the dissemination of antimicrobial resistance within the sheep food production system.
PUBMED_42766628	PubMed	2026	Of cattle and humans: A narrative review on the re-emergence of the New World screwworm (Cochliomyia hominivorax) and its threat to human health. Following more than two decades of successful elimination of the New World screwworm fly from Central and North America, new outbreaks emerged in Panama in 2023, initially affecting livestock, and rapidly spreading northward to impact not only livestock but also companion animals and humans. Forest degradation, increasing cattle density, and climate-driven shifts in the fly's distribution-particularly its recolonization of regions it historically occupied-are converging to expose critical gaps in preparedness and cross-sector coordination. In this review, we examine the drivers of screwworm re emergence and present current clinical and epidemiological evidence of human infection, highlighting ongoing barriers to detection and response. Building on lessons from recent zoonotic health emergencies, we propose actionable One Health recommendations aimed at tackling the re-emergence of screwworm. An effective response will require sustained political commitment and coordinated cross-border collaboration to prevent further spread, protect vulnerable populations, and ensure that this myiasis is prioritized, ending the neglect of this tropical disease.
PUBMED_42787980	PubMed	2026	One Health - One Planet - One Mind: integrating eco-anxiety into the One Health paradigm. Climate change and environmental degradation affect not only ecosystems and physical health but also psychological well-being. Eco-anxiety-defined as chronic or anticipatory distress related to perceived environmental decline-has emerged as a growing public mental health concern. Although One Health frameworks recognise the interdependence of human, animal, and environmental health, psychosocial processes shaping behavioural responses to environmental change remain underdeveloped within One Health discourse. This conceptual review positions eco-anxiety as a psychosocial determinant operating within the One Health-One Planet-One Mind continuum. Rather than treating eco-anxiety solely as a mental health outcome, we conceptualize it as a mediating and bidirectional process through which environmental disruption influences human behavior, multispecies health outcomes, and system-level resilience. Drawing on interdisciplinary evidence from environmental psychology, planetary mental health, and One Health literature, we synthesise pathways through which eco-anxiety may promote adaptive behaviors-such as environmental stewardship and community mobilization-or, when unaddressed, contribute to maladaptive responses including disengagement and reduced resilience. We propose a conceptual framework that embeds eco-anxiety within One Health architecture, illustrating feedback loops linking planetary change, psychosocial responses, behavioural pathways, and multispecies health outcomes. We conclude by outlining implications for One Health policy, monitoring, and intervention, highlighting the value of integrating psychosocial determinants into multisectoral strategies addressing climate-related health challenges.
PUBMED_42770112	PubMed	2026	One Health Approach for Mitigation of Impact of Climate Change on Early Childhood Development. Climate change is an unavoidable process and its effects on the environment is varied in different geographies. In developing world, the effects of climate change have an enormous impact on young children. Climate change deeply impacts early childhood development, posing distinctive challenges to young children through disruptions in health resources, such as air, water, food, and shelter. These disruptions result in increased vulnerability to extreme weather events, respiratory diseases, malnutrition, and vector-borne illnesses, all of which can hinder physical, cognitive, and emotional growth. The one health approach, emphasizing the interconnectedness of human, animal, and environmental health, offers a holistic framework for addressing these challenges. This article serves to raise significant risks in climate change and its effects on early childhood, such as health impacts of extreme weather, deterioration of air quality, nutritional risks, and diseases. It espouses cross-sector collaboration to drive integrated services that strengthen resilience in health systems, as well as further develop environmental education for empowerment of communities. Moreover, it puts emphasis on research-informed policymaking for the effective creation of targeted interventions for vulnerabilities in children. One health approach would be appropriate for societies with resource limitations and political barriers. Adapting to this approach can sustainably lead to multidisciplinary solutions. Resilient health systems, community awareness, early childhood priority in climate action plans, and healthy and sustainable futures for current and subsequent generations can all be ensured through mitigation of adverse effects of climate change.
PUBMED_42765021	PubMed	2026	One Health approach to radionuclides in milk and meat: Transfer mechanisms, processing effects, regulatory limits, and mitigation strategies.
PUBMED_42696199	PubMed	2026	One Health in hospital settings: the role of water as an invisible reservoir of opportunistic pathogens. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the microbiological quality of a hospital's treated water distribution system, characterize opportunistic bacterial isolates and their antimicrobial susceptibility profiles, investigate the genetic relatedness between environmental and clinical isolates from a One Health perspective. STUDY DESIGN: Prospective observational study. METHODS: A total of 352 water samples were collected over six months from strategic locations within a public teaching hospital. Samples were analyzed for total coliforms, Escherichia coli, heterotrophic bacteria (HB), bacterial isolation and identification, antimicrobial susceptibility testing, and ERIC-PCR genotyping was applied to Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates to analyse their similarity with clinical isolates. Statistical analysis used the chi-square test of independence ( 2). RESULTS: Despite legal compliance for coliforms, elevated HB counts were found in 17% of water tank samples and 12% of ICU samples. Pathogens such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, and Enterobacter spp. were isolated. Enterobacter spp. isolates exhibited resistance to multiple -lactams. Genotypic analysis did not reveal a direct clonal relationship between P. aeruginosa isolates from water and NDM-producing P. aeruginosa isolates recovered from hospitalized patients. CONCLUSIONS: Although the hospital water distribution system complied with current microbiological potability standards, opportunistic bacteria were detected in localized areas of the network. The absence of clonal relatedness between environmental and clinical P. aeruginosa isolates suggests that the water system was not an active source of dissemination during the study period. These findings support the value of routine environmental surveillance as part of infection prevention strategies within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42703855	PubMed	2026	One Health prescribing - development of enantioselective liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry methods to inform chiral switch of prescription pharmaceuticals. The One Health philosophy highlights the need to sustainably balance and optimise the health of humans, animals, and ecosystems. Pharmaceuticals are essential for human health, but their usage poses downstream risks to aquatic life. Thus, pharmaceuticals need to be environmentally friendlier whilst delivering the same intended health outcomes. Chiral switch, whereby racemic formulations are replaced with enantiopure versions, is proposed to reduce the environmental burden of pharmaceuticals under the One Health philosophy. This research aimed to develop enantioselective methodologies applicable to complex environmental matrices to inform the chiral switch of commonly prescribed pharmaceuticals. This was achieved using cation exchange solid-phase extraction (SPE) and two separate chiral-high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) methods for selective detection and quantification of 16 pharmaceuticals (anti-depressants, beta-blockers, calcium-channel blocker, central nervous system stimulant, skeletal muscle relaxant) and primary metabolites in wastewaters. An InfinityLab Poroshell 120 Chiral-V was used to separate cationic enantiomers and CHIRALPAK ZWIX(+) for zwitterions with enantioresolutions ranging from 0.6 to 4.2. Quantitation limits and trueness values of the SPE-chiral HPLC methods ranged from 6.5 10-2 ng L-1 to 42 ng L-1 and from 60% to 119%, respectively. Application of the methodology to wastewater samples revealed several analytes were in non-racemic composition including citalopram, fluoxetine, mirtazapine, desmethylmirtazapine, and ritalinic acid. Greatest enantiomer enrichment was observed for desmethylmirtazapine with a maximum enantiomeric fraction of 0.80. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge this is the first study to report the enantiomeric composition of baclofen, amlodipine, hydroxyatenolol and ritalinic acid in wastewater. Further application of these newly developed methods can help develop more accurate environmental risk assessments of pharmaceutical enantiomers to inform the proposed chiral switch decision making process in healthcare.
PUBMED_42788577	PubMed	2026	One Health to Advance Tuberculosis Elimination in Brazil: A New Area of the Brazilian Tuberculosis Research Network.
PUBMED_42765068	PubMed	2026	One Health-based Joint Epidemiological Investigation of a Severe Fever with Thrombocytopenia Syndrome Case in the Republic of Korea, 2025. OBJECTIVES: Following a healthcare-associated cluster of severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS), a One Health-based joint epidemiological investigation integrating human, animal, and environmental components was conducted around the residence of the index patient to identify potential risk factors for infection and support the development of a standardized joint investigation framework. METHODS: Epidemiological investigations and family interviews were conducted to assess the patient's activities during the incubation period, including farming activities and history of contact with animals. Ticks were collected using dry ice-baited traps and flagging methods and tested for SFTS virus (SFTSV). Samples collected from a companion dog, stray cats, and water deer were analyzed using real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and indirect immunofluorescent antibody assay. RESULTS: No SFTSV antigens or antibodies were detected in animal samples, suggesting that the case was unlikely to have resulted from animal-to-human transmission. A total of 341 Haemaphysalis longicornis ticks were collected, but all samples tested negative for SFTSV. Repeated vector control measures implemented after case identification may have affected vector density and test results. Epidemiological findings indicated frequent outdoor exposure during the incubation period, including gardening and walking along grassy rice-field banks. Although environmental and animal samples tested negative for SFTSV, the epidemiological findings suggested potential exposure to infected ticks. CONCLUSIONS: This investigation demonstrated the field applicability of a One Health-based joint epidemiological investigation integrating human, animal, and environmental surveillance. The findings highlighted the need for a multisectoral collaborative system and a standardized joint epidemiological investigation framework to strengthen future responses to zoonotic disease responses.
PUBMED_42762637	PubMed	2026	Open-air drug markets and opioid-related overdose deaths. Place-based drug-related overdose studies rarely measure where drugs are sold directly, despite the potential policy value of identifying micro-areas where overdose prevention resources can be targeted. This study examines whether open-air drug-selling locations are associated with opioid-related overdose deaths on Chicago's Westside. I identified 86 open-air drug-selling locations through systematic field observation (May-December 2025). Opioid-related overdose deaths were drawn from the Cook County Medical Examiner's case archive and assigned to a monthly panel of 161 census block groups (January-December 2025; 1932 block group-months). Associations were estimated using Poisson regression with month fixed effects and census-tract fixed effects, with standard errors clustered by block group. Drug-selling locations were operationalized as (1) a count of observed drug-selling spots located within each block group, (2) a one-block spillover count, and (3) a distance-decay crowding score. Drug-selling locations were strongly positively associated with opioid-related overdose deaths across specifications: count of spots within each block group (IRR 1.672, p .001), one-block spillover count (IRR 1.333, p .001), and the crowding measure (IRR 1.581, p .001). Transit hubs and Chicago Police search warrants that resulted in the seizure of opioids were also positively associated with overdose deaths. The findings are supported by agglomeration theory, which predicts a larger number of buyers will be attracted to crowded market ecologies. The results can inform hyperlocal overdose prevention strategies, including targeted naloxone distribution, harm-reduction outreach, and linkage to treatment in areas where selling infrastructure is concentrated.
PUBMED_42784792	PubMed	2026	Operationalizing One Health to Predict and Prevent Cross-Boundary Infectious Disease Threats.
PUBMED_42689826	PubMed	2026	PM2.5 Exposure and the Prognosis of Severe Fever with Thrombocytopenia Syndrome: An Integrated Epidemiological and Experimental Study. Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) is an emerging infectious disease with substantial mortality. While fine particulate matter (PM2.5) is a recognized risk factor for multiple infectious diseases, its role in the prognosis of SFTS remains unexplored. In a cohort of 3583 hospitalized SFTS patients, we found that long-term pre-admission exposure to ambient PM2.5 was significantly associated with an increased risk of SFTS-attributable death, with a corresponding hazard ratio of 1.16 (95% CI: 1.04 and 1.30) per 10 g/m3 increment. Exploratory mediation analysis suggested that viral load partially explains this association. In a model-based counterfactual burden assessment, we estimated that 137 SFTS-attributable deaths in Xinyang during 2010-2022 might have been potentially avoidable under a hypothetical scenario in which annual PM2.5 concentrations complied with the Chinese National Ambient Air Quality Standards. Complementary experimental studies showed that PM2.5 pre-exposure exacerbated SFTSV infection, increasing viral replication and tissue injury. Transcriptomic analyses implicated mitochondrial redox metabolism and reactive-oxygen-species-related pathways, while ROS/MDA measurements and N-acetylcysteine intervention supported PM2.5-induced oxidative priming as a plausible upstream contributing mechanism for enhanced SFTSV replication and disease severity. In summary, this study provides epidemiological evidence linking long-term PM2.5 exposure to poorer SFTS prognosis and suggests a biologically plausible role of oxidative stress-related redox imbalance. These findings highlight the potential relevance of air-quality improvement for reducing severe outcomes of SFTS in endemic regions.
PUBMED_42672081	PubMed	2026	Pan genome clustering identifies a novel mosaic prophage specific to Salmonella Enteritidis lineage associated with the invasive disease in India. Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis is a leading cause of invasive non-typhoidal Salmonella (iNTS) disease globally, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. In contrast, the epidemiology and population structure of invasive S. Enteritidis in South Asia remain poorly characterized. This study investigates the clinical presentation, phylogenetic relationships and genomic characteristics of S. Enteritidis bloodstream infections (BSIs) in India. Clinical data were collected from 101 patients with S. Enteritidis BSI between 2012 and 2022. Whole-genome sequencing was performed on representative bloodstream isolates together with isolates from non-blood clinical specimens and poultry sources. Comparative genomic analyses included phylogenetic reconstruction, invasiveness index prediction, and prophage characterization. Infants and immunosuppressed individuals were disproportionately affected by iNTS disease. Phylogenetic analysis identified four major lineages of S. Enteritidis. Most BSI isolates clustered in a previously unrecognized lineage, designated the Global Intermediate Clade, which occupied a phylogenetic position between the Global outlier and Global epidemic clades. Bayesian inference dated its most recent common ancestor to around 1789 AD (95% HPD: 1692-1941), with global circulation confirmed by European and Asian isolates. The Global Intermediate clade exhibited the second-highest invasiveness index (median 0.221, SD 0.013) after the West African clade; however, this index reflects genomic signatures associated with invasiveness and should not be interpreted as a direct measure of virulence. Poultry isolates clustered separately from the dominant bloodstream-associated lineage. Pan-genome analysis identified a lineage-specific mosaic prophage composed of modules homologous to prophages found in diverse Enterobacterales. This study provides the first detailed genomic insight into invasive S. Enteritidis in India and identifies a previously unrecognized Global Intermediate Clade associated with bloodstream infection. The distinct phylogenetic placement and genomic features of this lineage, including a lineage-specific mosaic prophage, warrant further investigation and support the need for expanded One Health genomic surveillance.
PUBMED_42702625	PubMed	2026	Pan-Ebolavirus nanoparticle vaccine provides protection in rodents from lethal infection by Zaire and Sudan viruses. Both Zaire ebolavirus (EBOV) and Sudan ebolavirus (SUDV) are members of the genus Ebolavirus and cause outbreaks marked by high fatality rates and repeated spillover from animal reservoirs. Filoviral glycoproteins (GPs) are the primary targets of neutralizing antibodies and form the basis of current vaccines. Here we describe the design, structural characterization, and evaluation of two-component self-assembling icosahedral I53-50 nanoparticles displaying prefusion EBOV or SUDV GP antigens, either individually or in cocktail and mosaic multivalent formats. EBOV-GP-I53-50 and SUDV-GP-I53-50 nanoparticles elicited strong homologous protection in mice and guinea pigs. In the mouse-adapted EBOV model (maEBOV), mosaic and cocktail formulations produced weak survival below that of the matched EBOV-GP-I53-50 GP immunogen. In contrast, in the gpaSUDV guinea pig model (gpSUDV), cocktail and mosaic nanoparticles elicited robust protection against gpSUDV, and detectable antibody responses to both SUDV and EBOV GPs. These findings demonstrate that multivalent GP-I53-50 nanoparticle immunogens can protect rodents from death, severe clinical signs of disease, and weight loss in relevant models. Together with the established clinical safety of the I53-50 platform, these results support continued efforts toward the development of a pan-ebolavirus vaccine.
PUBMED_42733675	PubMed	2026	Pathogenesis and Triazole Resistance in Aspergillus fumigatus: A Narrative Review Across the Host Immune Spectrum and One Health Context. This narrative review explores triazole resistance and pathogenesis of Aspergillus fumigatus (A. fumigatus) under a unified One Health framework, integrating evidence across host immune spectrums, agricultural environmental selection pressures, veterinary aspergillosis and clinical antifungal management. We illustrate layered host-fungus immune interactions underlying distinct clinical aspergillosis phenotypes, and delineate core resistance mechanisms including cyp51-related target alterations, enhanced efflux pump activity, biofilm-mediated tolerance and adaptive stress response rewiring. Special emphasis is placed on cross-sector transmission pathways of azole-resistant A. fumigatus (ARAF) originating from agricultural ecosystems, as well as surveillance deficits and public health risks linked to animal intermediate hosts. Novel antifungal agents, such as olorofim, fosmanogepix, rezafungin, ibrexafungerp, and T-2307, along with targeted delivery and immunomodulatory adjunct therapies for resistant aspergillosis, are also summarized. Literature published 2020-2026 was retrieved from PubMed via Boolean search strategies, with supplementary manual screening of landmark reference lists to include pivotal earlier studies. Only peer-reviewed original studies, epidemiological surveillance reports, and review articles with complete clinical or experimental datasets were incorporated following rigorous screening. Most studies discuss clinical or agricultural resistance separately, lacking integrated analyses covering human, animal, and environmental dimensions. Major knowledge gaps persist regarding horizontal gene transfer of resistance mutations, cross-species transmission chains, and translational applications of environmental monitoring data. This review summarizes existing research bottlenecks and proposes integrated multi-sector prevention and control strategies from a One Health perspective to curb the growing threat of triazole-resistant aspergillosis.
PUBMED_42685595	PubMed	2026	Patterns of pesticide use and potential health risks among men and women farmers in Rwanda: Practices, behaviors, and knowledge in Eastern Province. Rapid increases in pesticide use among smallholder farmers in Rwanda raise concerns about associated health impacts in human, animal and environmental systems. Women farmers warrant particular attention due to their substantial participation in agricultural labor and potential for distinct exposure patterns and health risks. We aimed to characterize pesticide use practices, safety knowledge, health effects and health concerns among Rwandan smallholder farmers using a gender-balanced, One Health-informed survey, which we administered to 109 male and 90 female smallholder farmers across 10 sectors of Rwanda's Eastern Province. Based on these self-reported data, we found pesticide use to be widespread and increasing, with more than 80% of participants reporting increased use within the past five years. The most used products were profenofos + cypermethrin insecticidal formulations and mancozeb-based fungicides, with 95% and 83% of participants reporting often or sometimes using these products, respectively. Self-reported symptoms potentially consistent with acute pesticides poisoning were also common, with 89% of participants reporting experiencing eye irritation, 83% rash, 73% headache and 67% breathing problems following pesticide use. Pesticide-related knowledge, concern, and safety behaviors were largely similar between men and women, including high levels of concern about health risks. Rwandan smallholder farmers increasingly rely on pesticides for crop protection, yet few receive formal training on safe application practices or protective behaviors. Our research identifies a consistent desire for additional pesticide health and safety training and important gaps in protective behaviors among the respondents, generating actionable insights for targeted interventions and safer agricultural practices.
PUBMED_42727281	PubMed	2026	Paving an interfacial hydrogen superhighway via N-bridged Ru nanoparticles with Cu single atoms for efficient nitrate electroreduction to ammonia. Electrocatalytic nitrate reduction to ammonia is strongly dependent on the availability of active hydrogen ( H). Either insufficient H supply or excessive H accumulation at the catalyst surface can compromise ammonia production and Faradaic efficiency. To address this challenge, a RuNP/Cu NC catalyst was developed by constructing N-bridged Ru nanoparticles on a carbon nitrogen support anchored by single-atom Cu. In this architecture, Ru nanoparticles generate H and establish a hydrogen-transfer pathway across the Ru nanoparticles/Cu single atoms interface, thereby promoting nitrate enrichment and subsequent hydrogenation. The RuNP/Cu NC catalyst achieved an NH3 yield rate of 7.92 mg h-1 cm-2 with a Faradaic efficiency of 97.22%, together with an energy efficiency of 34.31%, far surpassing those of RuNP/NC (9.75%) and Cu NC (13.64%). Operando DRT analysis revealed accelerated interfacial charge-transfer kinetics on RuNP/Cu NC, facilitating hydrogen spillover from Ru sites to adsorbed NO3- species on neighboring Cu sites. In situ FTIR spectroscopy captured the key intermediate NH2OH. Theory calculations further showed that the hydrogenation superhighway established at the strong metal-support (MSI) interactions interface lowers the hydrogenation energy barrier of NH2OH. This work establishes a hydrogen-regulated reaction pathway and demonstrates the advantages of MSI for efficient ammonia electrosynthesis.
PUBMED_42711057	PubMed	2026	Pediatric Vaccination and Pandemic Preparedness in Humanitarian Settings. Disease outbreaks are increasing in frequency and complexity, disproportionately affecting children in humanitarian settings. Large numbers of zero-dose children live in conflict-affected contexts, heightening vulnerability to vaccine-preventable and emerging viral diseases. Effective pediatric vaccination and pandemic preparedness require integrated, context-adapted strategies encompassing community engagement, infodemic management, resilient delivery systems, service integration, and reliable surveillance. Innovations such as mobile teams, novel financing, and improved data coordination offer promise but require stronger evidence. Lessons from coronavirus disease of 2019 (COVID-19) underscore persistent inequities and the need for ethical, data-driven, and One Health-informed approaches to protect children's right to health and strengthen global health security.
PUBMED_42772245	PubMed	2026	Performance expectancy of AI and disclosure consequences: A psychological paradox. This study examines how AI-assisted hiring systems shape job seekers' motivational cognitions and how AI disclosure influences evaluative judgments. Specifically, it investigates how applicants' perceived performance expectancy of AI-assisted hiring systems influences their own performance expectancy of Generative AI tools and their subsequent intention to use them in crafting job applications, and hence how the disclosure of Generative AI assistance affects hiring managers' perceptions of applicants' pre-hire outcomes i.e. likeability and hireability, within AI-mediated selection contexts. Drawing on a cognitive-motivational lens, two experimental studies were conducted. Study 1 demonstrates a spillover effect whereby favorable perceptions of AI-assisted hiring enhance applicants' performance expectancy of Generative AI, thereby increasing their intention to adopt such tools. Study 2 reveals a psychological paradox: while disclosure of Generative AI use signals transparency, it simultaneously alters evaluators' social and competence-based judgments, producing differentiated effects on likeability and hireability compared to non-assisted applicants. Although experimental designs ensure internal validity, they may not fully capture the complexity of real-world hiring dynamics; future research could examine longitudinal consequences of AI disclosure norms and their implications for trust and psychological contracts in AI-enabled organizations. By highlighting the tension between technological efficiency and social evaluation, this study contributes to understanding the psychological mechanisms underlying AI adoption and assessment, offering practical insights for designing fair and psychologically sustainable AI-mediated recruitment systems.
PUBMED_42696215	PubMed	2026	Phylogeographic analysis of Staphylococcus nepalensis reveals global occurrence of antimicrobial-resistant lineages carrying the sal(E) resistance gene. BACKGROUND: Staphylococcus nepalensis is an emerging species first described in 2003 from the respiratory tract of goats in Nepal. We report the identification of S. nepalensis of a hypersaline lagoon in Brazil, along with in-depth phylogeographical and resistome analysis of publicly available genomes. METHODS AND RESULTS: During a local survey from hypersaline aquatic environments in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, two staphylococcal strains were recovered, designated as COLB and AM1. These isolates were subjected to antimicrobial susceptibility testing, genomic sequencing, and comprehensive phylogenomic analyses. Genomic analysis confirmed the taxonomic identity of COLB and AM1 as S. nepalensis. Both isolates harbored the sal(E) conferring resistance to pleuromutilins and streptogramin A, whereas tet(K) conferring to tetracyclines. Additionally, AM1 carried lnu(A), consistent with the reduced susceptibility to clindamycin (MIC 2 g/mL) relative to COLB. Genes associated with arsenic and copper tolerance, and the replicons rep7a and rep19c, were confirmed. Phylogenomic analysis indicated that COLB and AM1 were clonally related (1 cgSNP-difference) but distinct from global isolates. Phylogeographic analysis revealed wide geographic occurrence, with some lineages carrying blaZ and mecA associated with beta-lactamase production and methicillin resistance, respectively. Strikingly, sal(E) is conserved across all S. nepalensis genomes. CONCLUSIONS: The findings confirm the presence of S. nepalensis in South America as early as 2016 and documented among available genomes from environmental, human, and animal-associated sources. Furthermore, reveal the circulation of some lineages carrying clinically relevant antimicrobial genes, underscoring the importance of accurate species identification and continuous genomic surveillance and potential One Health relevance.
PUBMED_42747542	PubMed	2026	Phytotelm and anthropogenic mosquitoes: community structure in natural and artificial habitats in an Atlantic Forest agroforestry system, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Agroforestry systems (AFSs) combine agricultural crops with native or exotic trees to promote sustainable production while creating heterogeneous landscapes with diverse fauna microhabitats. In the Atlantic Forest biome, how these systems shape immature mosquito (Culicidae) communities and vector dynamics remains poorly understood. We characterized the immature mosquito community (larvae and pupae) across five larval habitat types, three natural (bromeliads, bamboo internodes, and peach palm leaf bracts) and two artificial (a plastic tarp and a water barrel), in an AFS in the state of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. A total of 5,314 specimens belonging to 38 species distributed in 10 genera were collected. Natural larval habitats, particularly bromeliads and bamboo internodes, presented the highest species richness and harbored most of the exclusive taxa. Artificial habitats harbored fewer species, among them Culex quinquefasciatus, a synanthropic species of public health importance. Other epidemiologically relevant mosquitoes were Haemagogus leucocelaenus, Haemagogus janthinomys, and Aedes albopictus, the last of these a highly generalist species recorded in both natural and artificial larval habitats. Our results show that AFSs act as interface zones between forest and human-altered environments, with significant epidemiological implications: such systems can favor arbovirus spillover and bring vectors, human populations, and wildlife reservoirs into closer contact.
PUBMED_42777402	PubMed	2026	Plastisphere as a global hotspot for antimicrobial resistance: Systematic review and quantitative synthesis. Plastic debris provides colonizable surfaces for microbial biofilms, the plastisphere, which is now recognized as a hotspot for antimicrobial resistance (AMR) amplification and dissemination. This PRISMA 2020-compliant synthesis covers 53 studies. Random-effects meta-analysis of 30 conjugation datasets showed enhanced horizontal gene transfer: pooled log response ratio (lnRR) 1.93 (95% CI: 1.63-2.23), 6.9-fold (95% CI: 5.1-9.3-fold); heterogeneity was high (I2 85.0%; 2 0.573; Q 187.6, df 29) and the 95% prediction interval spanned 1.5-31.3-fold. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) biofilms showed the largest sub-group effect (lnRR 2.72; 95% CI: 1.84-3.60; 15.2-fold), and polymer type was significant as a categorical moderator (QM 12.3, P 0.006; R2 29%) but not as a continuous ordinal score (P 0.15). Antibiotic resistance gene (ARG) concentrations exceeded paired controls by one to three orders of magnitude (median log10 enrichment 1.98; 95-fold). Ampicillin resistance in plastisphere-associated Vibrio spp. reached 68.4% (Wilson 95% CI: 57.3-77.8%), with 32.9% multidrug-resistant. A conceptual five-stage genetic reactor lifecycle model is proposed as a heuristic, not a validated framework, identifying dispersal as the least-evidenced stage. A polymer risk hierarchy (PVC polyethylene (PE) polystyrene (PS), with polyethylene terephthalate (PET) lowest for ARG enrichment), an exposure-response framework and four Tier-1 knowledge gaps are established. The evidence base is geographically skewed (38% of studies from Chinese systems), and these estimates describe environmental enrichment, not realized clinical risk. They nonetheless justify incorporating polymer-additive regulation and plastisphere resistome surveillance into One Health strategies and the UN Plastics Treaty.
PUBMED_42763351	PubMed	2026	Policy Standards for Healthy Built Environments: A Systematic Review of Health Impact Assessments and Nonrandomized Evaluations of Implemented Policies. The use of policy standards for the built environment is increasingly explored, yet evidence on their health impact is limited. This systematic review assesses the impact and projected effects of built environment policy standards on health, alongside factors influencing observed changes and lessons learned. We conducted a comprehensive search across 11 databases for studies published between 1990 and 2024 evaluating policy standards targeting the domains of publicly accessible urban green space (UGS), transportation, or food environment in upper-middle- and high-income countries and reporting a health-related outcomes. Prospective modeling and retrospective studies with before and after or comparison groups were eligible. Data extraction covered mortality, morbidity, health determinants, unanticipated findings and reported implementation lessons. Risk-of-bias assessment employed the ROBINS-I and PROBAST tools as well as an additional quality appraisal for HIAs. Of 11,247 records screened, 27 studies were included. Health Impact Assessments (HIAs) on UGS policy standards estimated, among other outcomes, up to 25 fewer projected deaths/100,000; one HIA on superblocks (mixed domains) projected twice that number. A HIA on a transport standard projected 3.1% less cardiovascular morbidity. In evaluations of applied policy standards, a transport intervention was associated with more walking. Two of three applied food stocking studies were associated with increased healthy food sales. In mixed-domain studies, the Liveable Neighborhood Guidelines were associated with increased odds for walking outcomes and sense of community, and studies on 20-minute neighborhoods were associated with increased odds for walking outcomes, but no change in BMI or food-related outcomes. Several applied studies reported unplanned effects such as spillover effects of the intervention to neighboring areas and increased revenues. HIAs highlighted addressing gentrification and ensuring quality of UGS. The wide range of outcomes and methods limited comparability across studies, while the modeling nature of HIAs and the observational design of most applied studies complicated the risk-of-bias assessment and generally resulted in low certainty of evidence. Many applied policy standards were associated with beneficial health behaviors, suggesting applied policy standards can be effective for improving health outcomes. HIAs projected health effects of various extents. However, it remains important to assess potential unintended consequences and evaluate whether policy standards contribute to reducing health inequalities.
WHO_46	WHO	2024-03-13T09:24:38Z	Poliomyelitis - Indonesia 22 new polio cases were confirmed in Indonesia, bringing the total number of cases to 122. The new cases are from West Java province. Recently confirmed cases in Sumatra and Central Java occurred outside the area where two emergency vaccination campaigns were held on 31 May and 29 June. A large outbreak response immunization targeting 78,000 children aged less than five years was held from 26 June around the case in Central Java. Sumatra and Central Java will be included in the next phase of the large-scale immunization campaigns, which will start from August. Global Polio Eradication Initiative
PUBMED_42724587	PubMed	2026	Pollinators in Blackcurrant Orchards: Complementary Roles of Sown and Spontaneous Flower Strips and Limited Spillover of Small Wild Bees Within Fields. Agricultural intensification threatens pollinators and associated ecosystem services through pesticide use and the loss and fragmentation of natural habitats. Sowing flower strips and preserving spontaneous flowers are commonly recommended practices to support pollinators within fields. However, their effectiveness remains variable across studies and pollinator morphogroups, and their influence on pollinator activity is poorly studied in several crops, particularly in blackcurrant. Here, we studied flowering plant communities (sown and spontaneous) and four pollinator morphogroups (Bombus, large wild bee, small wild bee, and hoverfly) in nine blackcurrant orchards in Burgundy (France) during three sampling rounds in spring 2023. A seed mixture was previously sown by farmers in spring 2022 in four orchards, and in autumn 2022 or spring 2023 in the others. In each morphogroup, we investigated whether pollinator abundance in the blackcurrant inter-rows was influenced by the number of sown and spontaneous flowers and by position within the inter-rows (edge, inner, centre). We also examined whether pollinator abundance in blackcurrant bushes was related to floral abundance and pollinator activity in adjacent inter-rows. Flowering plant communities varied across sampling rounds, with sown species flowering only in inter-rows sown in spring 2022. The abundance of small and large bees increased with the number of spontaneous flowers, whereas hoverfly abundance increased with sown flowers. Small bee abundance, and to a lesser extent that of large bees, decreased in the inner and central transects of the inter-rows compared to the edge. Moreover, for all morphogroups, pollinator abundance in blackcurrant bushes was not influenced by flower abundance but increased with pollinator abundance in the adjacent inter-rows. These findings emphasise the complementary value of sown and spontaneous floral resources to support pollinators within orchards. The sharp decline in small bee abundance toward orchard interiors suggests potential dispersal limitations and highlights the importance of integrating suitable habitats to facilitate pollinator movement within crops.
PUBMED_42706992	PubMed	2026	Polychlorinated Diphenyl Ethers and One Health: An Integrated Perspective on an Underestimated Class of Persistent Organic Pollutants. Polychlorinated diphenyl ethers (PCDEs) represent a category of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) produced unintentionally during thermal processes and industrial chlorophenol synthesis. Despite possessing structural features and physicochemical properties such as high lipophilicity and long-range transport potential, which are comparable to regulated substances like PCBs and PBDEs, PCDEs are not yet formally restricted under the Stockholm Convention. This review integrates environmental chemistry, ecotoxicology, and public health data through a One Health lens to map their global distribution, which extends to remote polar ecosystems and complex aquatic food webs. Human and wildlife exposure occurs primarily through the consumption of contaminated lipid-rich animal products, with localized risks near legacy industrial sites. Toxicological evidence indicates that planar PCDE congeners act as aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) agonists, triggering dioxin-like effects such as hepatotoxicity and developmental impairment, while non-planar variants potentially disrupt thyroid and estrogenic signaling pathways. Significant research gaps persist regarding human biomonitoring, congener-specific toxic equivalency factors (TEFs), and the influence of climate change on contaminant remobilization. A transdisciplinary One Health strategy, which prioritizes source mitigation, global monitoring harmonization, and the formal evaluation of PCDEs for international regulatory listing, is proposed.
PUBMED_42746100	PubMed	2026	Population Status, Ecology and Conservation Challenges of Cattle Egrets (Bubulcus ibis), Especially in the Southern Africa Subregion: A Systematic Review and Evidence Synthesis. The Cattle Egret (Bubulcus ibis) is one of Africa's most adaptable yet environmentally sensitive waterbirds, occupying natural wetlands, grazing systems, irrigated agro-mosaics and urban green spaces. We conducted a systematic review of 173 studies published between the 1940s and 2025, incorporating global research where it provided insights relevant to Southern African populations. Using narrative synthesis and quantitative summaries, we evaluated population trends, habitat use, breeding ecology, threats and ecosystem services. Across all studies, habitat and foraging ecology dominated the literature (46.2%), followed by population status and distribution (21.4%), breeding ecology and behaviour (16.8%) and threats and contaminants (15.6%). In Southern Africa, atlas interpretations and site-based surveys from South Africa, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Namibia and Lesotho indicate generally stable or increasing populations over the past three decades, with SABAP-derived occupancy rising from 0.38 (1987-1991) to 0.60 (2007-present). Densities generally peak in irrigated pastures and peri-urban green spaces of eastern South Africa, but remain low in arid Namibia, high-altitude Lesotho and Zambia's under-sampled floodplains. Foraging studies show diets dominated by Orthoptera, enhanced success near livestock and machinery and seasonal shifts in both diet and foraging locations that reflect hydrology-driven changes in prey availability and habitat accessibility. Breeding studies report opportunistic, rainfall-synchronised nesting, mean colony sizes of 65 nests, clutch sizes of 2.9 eggs and fledging success of 62%. Key threats include loss of nesting habitat, extreme-weather colony failures, organochlorine contamination and pathogen spillover at poultry interfaces, while ecosystem-service benefits include pest suppression and nutrient redistribution. We recommend three priorities for future research: (1) advanced telemetry and stable-isotope analyses to map movements; (2) routine contaminant and pathogen screening within One Health frameworks; and (3) expanded atlas-based and citizen-science monitoring to address geographic bias. These steps will clarify the species' dual role as a service provider and early-warning indicator of environmental change across Southern Africa.
PUBMED_42736213	PubMed	2026	Population structure and antibiotic resistance of Salmonella isolates from diseased poultry in Jiangxi Province, China. Salmonella poses a significant threat to human and animal health. However, the relationship among population diversity, antibiotic resistance, and infection risk remains largely unexplored. In this study, 69 Salmonella strains were isolated from diseased poultry in Jiangxi Province from 2021 to 2024. Using whole-genome sequencing, serotype prediction, MLST, virulence and resistance gene analysis, antibiotic susceptibility testing, and mobile genetic element annotation, we characterized the diversity, resistance profiles, and transmission mechanisms of these strains. The results showed high diversity, with Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium ( 60%) and ST19 (62.31%) as the dominant serovar and sequence type, respectively. Several avian isolates were genomically similar to human isolates, indicating potential zoonotic risk. All strains harbored conserved core virulence modules, whereas accessory modules (e.g., cdtB, astA, pefA) varied and may affect pathogenicity. The multidrug resistance rate was 97.1%, with 100% resistance to erythromycin, tilmicosin and tiamulin, and resistance rates of 91.3%, 84.1%, and 71.0% to sulfonamides, enrofloxacin, and ceftiofur, respectively. Sixty-eight resistance genes were identified. Highly conserved antimicrobial resistance gene (ARG) modules (e.g., sul2-aph(3 )-Ib-aph(6')-Id-tet(A)) were shared between chromosomes and plasmids and were flanked by mobile elements such as Tn3 and IS3. Genomic islands (GIs) and plasmids in some strains carried resistance gene clusters highly homologous to those in pathogens from humans, pigs, and chickens, suggesting active horizontal transfer of resistance genes across hosts. This study revealed high diversity, prevalent multidrug resistance, and active horizontal transfer of resistance genes in avian-derived Salmonella from Jiangxi Province, emphasizing the need for cross-host resistance monitoring and antibiotic management within the 'One Health' framework.
PUBMED_42776647	PubMed	2026	Powassan Virus in the United States: An AI-Integrative One Health Scoping Review of Ecological Drivers, Zoonotic Interactions, Symptom Profiles, and Public Health Implications. BACKGROUND: Powassan virus (POWV) is the only tick-borne encephalitis-group flavivirus endemic to the United States (U.S.) and is an increasingly serious public health threat. Reported U.S. cases remain relatively few but have grown steadily-from fewer than two annually before 2005 to a record 60 in 2024-and neuroinvasive disease carries a 10-15% case fatality with lasting neurological sequelae in roughly half of the survivors. Examining POWV through a One Health lens, we conducted a scoping review of its ecological and zoonotic drivers, its interactions with co-circulating tick-borne pathogens, its full clinical spectrum, and its distinction from other tick-borne diseases. METHODS: Following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) guidance, we searched PubMed/MEDLINE, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) surveillance databases, state health-department publications, and vetted public-health news through early 2026. The review was conducted as an AI-integrative partnership among the authors, the Global Infectious Diseases and Epidemiology Online Network (GIDEON) database, and Claude (Anthropic), enabling a synthesis of human-curated archival records collected over six years alongside the published literature; this yielded over 200 sources, almost half unavailable through an AI search alone. RESULTS: POWV is maintained in a sylvatic cycle involving I. scapularis ticks, small-mammal reservoirs, and incidental human spillover. Its clinical spectrum spans asymptomatic seroconversion to fatal meningoencephalitis; prodromal fever, headache, vomiting, and fatigue may progress to encephalitis, seizures, aphasia, cranial-nerve palsies, paralysis, and ataxia-the most severe neurological syndrome among U.S. tick-borne diseases. Cases cluster in the northeastern and Great Lakes states, with older males disproportionately affected, while viral evidence extends to the mid-Atlantic, southern, and western regions. POWV is distinguished by its flaviviral etiology, short (as little as 15 min) transmission window, absence of a characteristic rash, and complete antibiotic resistance. Of the 48 states surveyed, only 7 published POWV data. CONCLUSIONS: POWV is an escalating One Health threat driven by expanding vector tick ranges, land-use and climate change, and wildlife-human interface dynamics. Enhanced cross-sector surveillance integrating human, animal, and environmental monitoring, alongside improved public-health data reporting, is urgently needed.
PUBMED_42779237	PubMed	2026	Practice and optimization pathways of the surveillance - response system for schistosomiasis during the elimination stage in China: a One Health perspective . This paper systematically analyzes schistosomiasis transmission risks during the elimination stage and reviews the evolution of the schistosomiasis surveillance system in China from a One Health perspective, with a special emphasis on schistosomiasis surveillance and response practices during the elimination stage from a One Health perspective. These practices include precise screening of human schistosomiasis under low-endemicity conditions, systematic monitoring of schistosomiasis in domestic and wild animals, ecological management of Oncomelania snails, and information-coordinated responses. Nevertheless, the current surveillance and response system for schistosomiasis suffers from challenges of insufficient cross-sectoral coordination and complex external environments, which constrain precise schistosomiasis surveillance and response in China. Therefore, it is urgently necessary to integrate coordination mechanisms, empower the surveillance system with technological innovation, improve capacity building, and actively promote diverse social participation in the One Health framework, so as to consolidate current schistosomiasis control achievements and achieve the target for schistosomiasis elimination across China, which may provide a replicable technical model for global zoonoses control.
PUBMED_42733759	PubMed	2026	Pre-exposure prophylaxis as a complementary vaccination strategy to reduce rabies in Kerala, India: a cost-effectiveness modelling study. BACKGROUND: Post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) and dog vaccination continue to be the widely adopted vaccination strategy for rabies control in high-burden countries like India. To determine the public health and economic impacts of childhood pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) relative to existing strategies, we carried out a modelling analysis in the state of Kerala, India. METHODS: We adapted a probabilistic decision-tree model over a 10-year time horizon (2026-2035). This timeframe is sufficient for dog vaccination to interrupt rabies transmission and for protection to accrue from PrEP delivered through routine childhood immunisation. The model simulates interactions between dog vaccination, PrEP, and PEP to estimate health provider costs, quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) gained, and net health benefit across a range of willingness-to-pay thresholds. FINDINGS: Assuming current practice of four-dose intradermal PEP and sub-optimal dog vaccination, we projected 431 rabies deaths (95% Prediction interval PI 353-523) and a cost of US 50.3 million over ten years, with dog vaccination responsible for almost 70% of deaths averted by this strategy. Routine childhood PrEP increased costs by US 10.5-36.5 million (INR 1.0-3.4 billion), depending on the regimen used, and cumulatively prevented only ten additional deaths beyond those averted by current practice. Incorporating PrEP was not optimal (probability 12%) across India's willingness-to-pay threshold. The intensified owned-dog vaccination strategy achieved the highest benefit at India's mean willingness-to-pay (739,420 QALYs; 28% probability of optimality), while adopting WHO's recommended abridged PEP regimen was the only cost-saving strategy (US 6.3 million saved; equivalent mortality to status quo). Comprehensive dog vaccination coverage of 70% combined with abridged PEP regimens became optimal at India's upper willingness-to-pay threshold, reducing deaths by 83% compared to current practice. INTERPRETATION: In high-PEP-access settings, PrEP is not cost-effective and provides negligible benefit. To maximise lives saved, PrEP should only be considered once gains from strengthening dog vaccination and PEP delivery have been exhausted. FUNDING: Wellcome Trust; Indian Council of Medical Research - Department of Health Research (ICMR-DHR) International Fellowship for Senior Biomedical Scientists.
PUBMED_42764973	PubMed	2026	Preliminary hematological values and blood cell morphology of wild-caught Spotted scat (Scatophagus argus) from Southern Thailand. BACKGROUND AND AIM: Spotted scat (Scatophagus argus) is a euryhaline teleost of increasing importance in aquaculture, ornamental fisheries, and environmental monitoring across the Indo-Pacific region. Hematological evaluation is a valuable tool for assessing fish health, physiological status, and environmental quality; however, species-specific reference data for spotted scat remain scarce. This study aimed to characterize blood cell morphology and morphometry and establish preliminary hematological reference values for wild-caught spotted scat from Southern Thailand to support veterinary diagnostics, future research, and biomonitoring applications. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty-six wild-caught spotted scats were collected from Tha Sung Canal, Nakhon Si Thammarat Province, Thailand, between June and August 2025. Fish were anesthetized with clove oil before blood collection from the caudal vein into ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid tubes. Wright-stained blood smears were prepared for microscopic evaluation of blood cell morphology and morphometry. Hemoglobin (Hb) concentration was measured using an automated hematology analyzer, whereas packed cell volume (PCV), erythrocyte and leukocyte counts, differential leukocyte counts, thrombocyte counts, and erythrocyte indices were determined using standard manual hematological methods. Descriptive statistics were generated, and leukocyte morphometry was compared using the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn's multiple-comparison test. RESULTS: Four leukocyte types were identified: neutrophils, eosinophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes. Neutrophils and monocytes were the largest leukocytes and exhibited similar diameters (p 0.05), although monocytes possessed a characteristically deeper blue cytoplasm that facilitated differentiation. Eosinophils occurred as small and large forms, whereas lymphocytes represented the predominant circulating leukocyte population. Juvenile male fish had a mean PCV of 0.24 0.07 L/L, Hb concentration of 74.41 20.94 g/L, erythrocyte count of 1.80 0.68 10 /L, and leukocyte count of 32.47 14.81 10 /L. Lymphocytes (16.14 7.27 10 /L) were the predominant leukocyte subtype, followed by monocytes, neutrophils, and eosinophils. CONCLUSION: This study provides the first comprehensive description of blood cell morphology together with preliminary hematological reference values for wild-caught spotted scat from Southern Thailand. These baseline data enhance diagnostic capacity for piscine hematology, support health assessment of ornamental and cultured fish, and provide a valuable foundation for future studies investigating environmental stress, disease, and the use of spotted scat as a bioindicator of freshwater, brackish, and mangrove ecosystems within the One Health framework.
PUBMED_42780870	PubMed	2026	Prevalence and Antimicrobial Resistance Profiles of Enterococci Isolated From Humans, Animals, and Environment in Bangladesh: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. BACKGROUND: Enterococci are important opportunistic pathogens responsible for a wide range of infections in humans and animals. Their ability to acquire and disseminate antimicrobial resistance (AMR) poses a growing public health concern. This study is aimed at estimating the pooled prevalence of enterococci and their AMR profiles among isolates from humans, animals, and environmental sources in Bangladesh. METHODS: We conducted a systematic literature search in PubMed, Google Scholar, and CAB Abstracts in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Studies published between January 2016 and November 2025 that reported the prevalence and/or AMR patterns of enterococci in Bangladesh were eligible for inclusion. A total of 36 studies met the inclusion criteria and were included in the final analysis. Pooled prevalence estimates were calculated using random-effects meta-analysis, with heterogeneity assessed via Cochran's Q and the I 2 statistic; AMR proportions were estimated using the Wilson method, and publication bias was evaluated using Egger's test and funnel plots. RESULTS: The pooled prevalence of enterococci was estimated at 12.05% (95% CI: 7.10-19.70), with substantial heterogeneity (I 2 99.4%). Among eight identified Enterococcus spp., Enterococcus faecalis was the most prevalent (25.1%; 95% CI: 20.9-29.2), followed by Enterococcus faecium (6.3%; 95% CI: 4.6-7.9). High resistance rates were observed against cefuroxime (77.1%) and ceftriaxone (73.4%), whereas resistance to vancomycin was 20.9%. CONCLUSIONS: The findings underscore the urgent need for rational antimicrobial use, strengthened infection prevention and control measures, improved environmental hygiene, and integrated One Health surveillance across human, animal, and environmental settings to mitigate the burden of antimicrobial-resistant enterococci.
PUBMED_42686042	PubMed	2026	Prevalence and genotype diversity of rotavirus A in humans, animals, and environmental water samples in West Africa: a systematic review and meta-analysis. OBJECTIVES: To systematically review and meta-analyze the prevalence and genetic diversity of rotavirus A (RVA) in humans, animals, and environmental water samples in West Africa and to describe its geographic distribution and circulation patterns. METHODS: PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, African Journals Online, ScienceDirect, SpringerLink, JSTOR, clinical trial registries, and global health libraries were searched for observational studies published from January 1, 2010, to December 20, 2025, reporting molecular RVA genotyping data from West Africa. Two reviewers independently screened studies, extracted data, assessed risk of bias using the Joanna Briggs Institute and SYRCLE tools, and summarized genotype distributions narratively. Random-effects meta-analyses were used to estimate pooled prevalence by source category. RESULTS: Fifty-four studies were included, comprising 21,532 samples and 2,080 RVA-positive cases. The overall pooled prevalence was 12.6% (95% confidence interval CI , 9.9%-15.6%). Prevalence was highest in animals (19.77%; 95% CI, 5.4%-40.1%), followed by environmental water samples (14.81%; 95% CI, 3.5%-31.1%) and humans (11.37%; 95% CI, 9.0%-14.0%). Overall heterogeneity was very high (I 97.1%). In human studies, G1P 8 , G9P 8 , and G2P 4 were among the most frequently detected and geographically widespread genotype combinations. CONCLUSION: RVA circulates widely in humans, animals, and environmental water samples across West Africa, although evidence is characterized by substantial heterogeneity, uneven geographic representation, and limited animal and environmental water data. These findings support integrated One Health surveillance, monitoring for genotype shifts, and stronger water, sanitation, and hygiene interventions.
PUBMED_42703547	PubMed	2026	Prevalence and patterns of antimicrobial resistance in Escherichia coli from Indonesian broiler chickens: Comparison of CLSI and EUCAST 2025 standards. Objectives: This study aimed to compare the prevalence and resistance patterns of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in Escherichia coli isolated from broiler chickens across Indonesia using the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) M100, 35th edition (2025), and the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) version 15.0 (2025) guidelines. Material and Methods: A total of 390 E. coli isolates were subjected to antimicrobial susceptibility testing using the broth microdilution method with the Sensititre EUVSEC3 panel. Resistance data were analyzed using the Chi-square test, Cohen's kappa coefficient, and percent agreement. Results: The highest resistance rates under both standards were observed for ampicillin (78.33% according to CLSI and 78.63% according to EUCAST), while all isolates remained susceptible to meropenem (100%) based on both references. Significant differences between CLSI and EUCAST interpretations were observed for colistin and ciprofloxacin (p 0.91). Conclusions: Variations in the interpretation of antimicrobial susceptibility testing results may influence AMR surveillance outcomes and antimicrobial use decision-making in the field. Strengthening and harmonizing AMR surveillance reporting based on both standards is essential to support evidence-based and effective AMR mitigation policies. This approach, within a One Health framework, is to safeguard animal health, public health, and food safety in Indonesia.
PUBMED_42787463	PubMed	2026	Prevalence of ESBL-associated resistance genes and antimicrobial resistance in Escherichia coli from pigs and cattle slaughtered at urban abattoirs in Lilongwe District, Malawi. Extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Escherichia coli in food-producing animals represents a priority public health concern because of its capacity for zoonotic transmission through the food chain and frequent co-carriage of multidrug resistance (MDR) determinants. Surveillance in sub-Saharan Africa remains disproportionately limited, and no published data characterize ESBL prevalence or resistance gene profiles in slaughter animals in Malawi. This study investigated the prevalence of E. coli harboring ESBL-associated resistance genes (blaCTX-M, blaSHV) and characterized antimicrobial resistance and MDR profiles in pigs and cattle slaughtered at urban abattoirs in Lilongwe District, Malawi. Rectal swabs were collected from 50 pigs and 50 cattle (n 100) at four urban abattoirs. Following exclusion of six samples with no bacterial growth, 94 confirmed isolates were analyzed. E. coli was identified by MALDI-TOF MS. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed by disk diffusion (CLSI) against gentamicin, chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, cefotaxime, and tetracycline. blaCTX-M and blaSHV genes were detected by conventional PCR. Of 94 confirmed E. coli isolates (48 pig, 46 cattle), pig isolates showed significantly higher resistance to gentamicin (50.0% vs. 15.2%; p 0.0008) and tetracycline (85.4% vs. 56.5%; p 0.004). Chloramphenicol resistance was high in both species (77.1% pigs; 63.0% cattle). blaCTX-M was detected in 12.5% of pig and 21.7% of cattle isolates; blaSHV in 20.8 and 6.5%, respectively (all p 0.05). MDR was significantly more prevalent in pig isolates (70.8%, 34/48) than in cattle isolates (41.3%, 19/46; crude OR 3.40, 95% CI 1.35-8.90; p 0.004). Pigs had a mean resistance count of 3.17 antibiotic classes per isolate compared with 2.26 in cattle. E. coli harboring targeted ESBL-associated genes circulates in both species at urban abattoirs in Lilongwe District, with pig isolates carrying a significantly higher MDR burden. These results provide an initial baseline for monitoring E. coli harboring targeted ESBL-associated genes at the livestock-food chain interface in Malawi. While stewardship practices were not directly assessed, the findings raise important implications for species-stratified antibiotic stewardship and highlight the value of systematic antimicrobial resistance monitoring within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42781381	PubMed	2026	Prevalence of Zoonotic Parasites and Genetic Diversity of Ancylostoma caninum in Dogs From Machakos County, Kenya. INTRODUCTION: Soil-transmitted helminths (STHs) remain a major global public health challenge, with dogs recognised as important reservoirs for several zoonotic species. In Kenya, data on the prevalence and genetic diversity of canine gastrointestinal helminths are scarce. This study investigated the prevalence of zoonotic helminths in dogs and characterised the genetic diversity of canine hookworms in Machakos County, Kenya. METHODS: A cross-sectional household-based survey was conducted across three sublocations representing low, medium and high human population density. Faecal samples were collected from 104 dog-owning households and examined using Mini-FLOTAC and zinc chloride sieving-flotation techniques. Hookworm species were identified using nested polymerase chain reaction targeting the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I gene, followed by DNA sequencing. Phylogenetic diversity of Ancylostoma caninum was assessed using median-joining haplotype network analyses. RESULTS: Mini-FLOTAC detected a higher prevalence of hookworm (89.4% vs. 81.6%), Toxocara spp. (45.2% vs. 19.7%) and taeniids (29.8% vs. 5.3%) compared to zinc chloride sieving-flotation. The latter identified additional parasites, including Trichuris spp. (9.2%), Spirocerca lupi (3.9%), Alaria spp. (1.3%) and Clonorchis sinensis (2.6%). A. caninum was the sole hookworm species identified, alongside genetically distinct A. caninum-like lineages. High genetic variability was observed, comprising 80 polymorphic sites and 40 haplotypes, of which 31 were singletons, seven occurred in two sequences each and two were represented by five and six sequences. Haplotype network and phylogenetic analyses revealed high genetic diversity and weak population structuring in A. caninum, with Kenyan isolates clustering with global lineages while exhibiting local diversification. We also report the first molecular confirmation of Angiostrongylus vasorum in domestic dogs in Kenya. CONCLUSIONS: These findings underscore dogs as key reservoirs of zoonotic helminths and highlight the need for strengthened surveillance and integrated One Health strategies incorporating molecular diagnostics and targeted education within dog health programmes in line with the WHO NTD Roadmap.
PUBMED_42719521	PubMed	2026	Prevalence, multidrug resistance patterns, and carbapenemase-encoding genes of carbapenemase-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli from clinical and non-clinical samples in Ethiopia: Systematic review and meta-analysis. BACKGROUND: Carbapenems are considered the last resort to treat life-threatening bacterial infections. However, their efficacy is increasingly compromised by carbapenemase-producing K. pneumoniae (CPKP) and Escherichia coli (CPEC). Although these organisms have been reported in Ethiopia, the overall burden and distribution of carbapenemase-encoding genes remain unclear. This study aims to determine the pooled prevalence of CPKP and CPEC from both clinical and non-clinical samples in Ethiopia and to identify the most common carbapenemase-encoding genes. METHODS: A systematic search was conducted in electronic databases for studies published in English up to June 30, 2025. The review followed PRISMA guidelines and included 44 eligible studies. Quality assessment was performed using the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) checklist. The meta-analysis was performed using Comprehensive Meta-Analysis (CMA) software version 2, applying a random-effects model to estimate pooled prevalence. Heterogeneity and publication bias were evaluated using the I2 statistic, funnel plot, and Egger's test. RESULTS: The pooled prevalence of CPKP and/or CPEC in Ethiopia was 8.3% (95% CI: 6.3-10.9; I2 86.41, p 0.001), with a higher prevalence in non-clinical samples (13.3%) than in clinical ones (8%). Six studies reported 60 carbapenemase-encoding genes in 51 K. pneumoniae isolates. The most dominant resistant gene was the bla NDM metallo- -lactamase type, accounting for 85%. The pooled prevalence of multidrug-resistant E. coli and/or K. pneumoniae reported by studies included in the review was 78.4% (95% CI 71-84.2, I2 96.10, p 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals a high pooled prevalence of CPKP and CPEC in Ethiopia and high dominance of the bla NDM carbapenemase gene. These findings underscore the need for enhanced antimicrobial resistance surveillance, infection prevention strategies, and stewardship interventions across both clinical and environmental settings.
PUBMED_42779236	PubMed	2026	Progress of researches on toxoplasmosis control strategies based on the One Health concept . Toxoplasmosis, a zoonotic disease caused by the obligate intracellular parasite Toxoplasma gondii, is widely prevalent across the world. The life cycle of T. gondii involves definitive hosts (cats and felines), intermediate hosts (humans, livestock, and wild animals), and the environment (such as soil and water). The One Health concept brings together the health of humans, animals, and the environment, with aims to pursue the optimal health outcomes through coordinated management. Management of toxoplasmosis from a One Health perspective may provide key insights into formulation of interventions for toxoplasmosis control. This article reviews the complex biological characteristics and life cycle of T. gondii, as well as the importance of felines as definitive hosts in the transmission of toxoplasmosis, analyzes the epidemiology, ecological impact and economic burden of toxoplasmosis, and discusses the bottlenecks in diagnostic and monitoring systems, environmental management technologies, and One Health interdisciplinary collaboration. In addition, toxoplasmosis control strategies are proposed based on the One Health concept, covering public health interventions, management of animal sources, multi-sector collaboration, and development of novel vaccines. These strategies provide insights into interruption of toxoplasmosis transmission and maintenance of the global public health security.
PUBMED_42763008	PubMed	2026	Projected spatial distribution and geographic shifts of suitable habitats for two major plague vectors under climate and land-use change in Qinghai, China. BACKGROUND: Climate change and land-use change may alter the suitable habitats of vector species. As two major plague vectors in Qinghai Province, Callopsylla dolabris (C. dolabris)and Oropsylla silantiewi (O. silantiewi) play important roles in plague transmission, and shifts in their suitable habitats may substantially increase the potential risk of plague spillover to humans. However, current plague prevention and control strategies primarily rely on historical epidemic distributions and lack forward-looking assessments of future risks. Therefore, predicting the distribution of plague vector suitable habitats under future scenarios and elucidating their spatial change patterns are essential for optimizing plague surveillance strategies and improving the allocation of prevention and control resources. METHODS: This study integrated plague vector occurrence records with 1 km-resolution bioclimatic variables, elevation, and land-use data. The maximum entropy (MaxEnt) model combined with GIS-based spatial analysis techniques was used to characterize the spatial distribution of suitable habitats for the two plague vectors under future climate scenarios and to elucidate their spatial change patterns. Finally, by spatially overlaying population data, priority surveillance areas within newly emerging suitable habitats of plague vectors were identified. RESULTS: This study found that, Under future scenarios, suitable habitats of both plague vectors showed overall expansion and spatial shifts toward northwestern regions and higher elevations. The two vectors exhibited distinct spatial patterns of priority surveillance areas within newly expanded habitats, with C. dolabris showing clustered distributions and O. silantiewi showing more dispersed patterns. CONCLUSION: This study characterized the spatial distribution patterns of suitable habitats for two major plague vectors in Qinghai Province, revealed their spatial dynamics, and identified priority surveillance areas within newly expanded suitable habitats. The findings provide scientific support for optimizing plague surveillance strategies and allocating prevention and control resources in Qinghai Province.
PUBMED_42779245	2026	 with aims to provide insights into achieving the target of schistosomiasis elimination in Jiangxi Province and China in 2030."	PubMed
PUBMED_42700684	PubMed	2026	Pulmonary microbial profiles in slaughtered Duolang sheep from Kashgar stratified by gross lung lesions: implications for respiratory disease surveillance. Ovine pneumonia is a multifactorial respiratory disease in which complex microbial communities and antimicrobial resistance complicate disease control. This study characterized pulmonary microbial profiles in 49 slaughtered Duolang sheep from Kashgar stratified by gross lung lesions (apparently healthy, n 10; pneumonic, n 39) using pathology, bacterial isolation, Mycoplasma ovipneumoniae PCR, antimicrobial susceptibility testing, and 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Suppurative pneumonia predominated in pneumonic lungs (31/39, 79.5%), and M. ovipneumoniae positivity was higher than in apparently healthy lungs (69.2% vs. 20.0%; OR 9.00, 95% CI, 1.66-48.88). Among 220 bacterial isolates recovered, co-isolation of at least two non-Escherichia genera remained detectable in at least 20/39 pneumonic lungs after exclusion of Escherichia. Of 120 isolates tested, 17 showed multidrug-resistant phenotypes. In the 16S subset, pneumonic lungs showed higher richness and Shannon diversity (FDR-adjusted P 0.045), with nominal enrichment of Pasteurellaceae and Mycoplasmataceae, whereas beta diversity did not differ. Despite overlap between pneumonia and M. ovipneumoniae status in the sequencing subset, these findings support integrated surveillance of pulmonary microbial profiles and antimicrobial resistance in ovine respiratory disease.
PUBMED_42772849	PubMed	2026	Q Fever Visceral Abscesses After Contact With Native Australian Marsupials. We describe two patients in Far North Queensland with acute Q fever. One patient had their infection complicated by a splenic abscess, the other developed a hepatic abscess. Both patients had contact with small Australian marsupials in the weeks before presentation and both required prolonged doxycycline to treat their infection.
PUBMED_42785458	PubMed	2026	Qualitative insights into behavioural risks for Taenia solium. In low- or middle-income countries, neglected tropical diseases like taeniasis/cysticercosis from Taenia solium have serious health, social and economic consequences. Despite urgent calls from WHO and governments for intensified control of T. solium, this remains challenging in practice. Intervention failures point to gaps in understanding about behaviours relating to T. solium risk and the critical need for insight into these behaviours. In this study we explored known behavioural risks associated with T. solium in northern Lao PDR. A qualitative assessment was conducted in 28 villages using group discussions, interviews and observation involving 438 people (female:male ratio of 35:65). The study identified a range of contextual and socio-cultural factors influencing risky behaviours, including previously unreported aspects. Raw pork is consumed by people from all four main ethnolinguistic groups, with raw pork dishes commonly available at traditional events, but less commonly part of ceremonial practice. Consumption of raw wild pork was frequently reported across the study villages and often preferred because of its taste. Open defecation is most common in places where toilet coverage is low, but the protective factor of toilets is undermined by time spent out of the village and seasonal water shortages. Free-roaming pigs are common seasonally, but less common when sanctions are in place and enforced. However, there are circumstances that result in a relaxing of rules including feed shortages, inadequate pens and traditional beliefs. Understanding these behavioural risks is essential for developing effective strategies to change behaviour and control/eliminate T. solium.
PUBMED_42674071	PubMed	2026	Rabies surveillance in the United States during 2024. OBJECTIVE: Describe the epidemiologic landscape of rabies and rabies testing in the US during 2024. METHODS: Animal rabies testing results from approximately 130 public health, agriculture, and academic laboratories are collected by the US National Rabies Surveillance System (NRSS) each month. Data reported in 2024 were analyzed to examine temporal and geographic trends in animal rabies cases by rabies virus variant (RVV). RESULTS: In 2024, 3,834 cases of animal rabies were reported to the NRSS (4.2% of 90,343 samples submitted), representing a 2.0% increase from 2023. Of positive samples, 331 (8.6%) were domestic animals, and 3,503 (91.4%) were wildlife. The most commonly found rabid domestic animal was cats (243 positive 1.3% positivity ), and the most commonly found wildlife were bats (1,376 positive 5.7% positivity ) followed by raccoons (1,080 10.1% positivity ). Two nonenzootic RVVs gained entry into the US in 2024. Four people died from rabies, including 2 who experienced bat exposures that were left untreated and 1 person whose case involved international travel. CONCLUSIONS: The expansion of the historical range of enzootic RVVs can lead to substantial public health and animal health burden. Domestically acquired human rabies cases in 2024 underscore the need for continual public education on the risks of rabies exposures to ensure timely and effective administration of postexposure prophylaxis. The internationally acquired human rabies case demonstrates that the US remains vulnerable to human and animal rabies importations. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The NRSS plays a crucial role in protecting public and animal health by monitoring rabies trends in the US.
PUBMED_42679575	PubMed	2026	Rapid SERS-machine learning-enabled virulence profiling of Acinetobacter baumannii for environmental surveillance. Acinetobacter baumannii (A. baumannii) is a critical multidrug-resistant pathogen capable of environmental dissemination through water and veterinary sources. Rapid analytical methods to identify high-risk strains are essential for One Health surveillance. Here, we report a proof-of-concept surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy and machine learning (SERS-ML) framework for rapid, label-free virulence-associated profiling of A. baumannii. Interestingly, whole-cell SERS spectra from 20 environmental and veterinary isolates (10 virulent, 10 avirulent) with silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) colloid yielded reproducible biochemical fingerprints in the 400-1800 cm-1 region. Particularly, virulent isolates exhibited enhanced spectral features corresponding to nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids, reflecting elevated metabolic activity, membrane complexity, and biofilm formation. To address replicate-level data leakage, we evaluated classification models across three validation schemes. While na ve spectrum-level cross-validation yielded inflated accuracies, strain-blocked GroupKFold and leave-one-strain-out (LOSO) cross-validations provided realistic accuracy of 78-88%, with partial least-squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) achieving optimal performance under LOSO (87.9% accuracy, receiver operating characteristic-area under the curve (ROC-AUC) 0.959). Moreover, confounding audits further revealed that geographic and host metadata are partially embedded within spectral signatures. Overall, this study highlights SERS-ML as a promising analytical technique for bacterial risk profiling, while emphasizing the critical necessity of strain-aware validation strategies in spectroscopic machine learning.
PUBMED_42683173	PubMed	2026	Rapid diagnosis of Chlamydia psittaci pneumonia with pleural effusion using multiplex PCR-based targeted next-generation sequencing: A case report. Chlamydia psittaci pneumonia (CPP) is a zoonotic disease with non-specific clinical and radiographic features, complicating timely diagnosis. Although not common, pleural effusion may indicate more severe disease. Conventional diagnostic methods lack the sensitivity and speed. The present report highlights the utility of multiplex PCR-based targeted next-generation sequencing (mp-tNGS) for rapid etiological diagnosis of CPP, particularly in patients with pleural effusion. A 52-year-old woman and a 64-year-old woman both presented with high fever, cough and systemic symptoms. Inflammatory markers (hs-CRP, IL-6 and ESR) were found to be markedly elevated with normal or mildly elevated white blood cell counts. A chest CT exhibited unilateral consolidations with small ipsilateral pleural effusions. Conventional microbiological tests (stains, cultures and serology) were negative. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid mp-tNGS rapidly identified Chlamydia psittaci (142 and 251 reads per 100,000 sequencing reads, respectively), with a mean turnaround time of 11.35 h (from laboratory receipt to result). Epidemiological history revealed exposure to pigeons and a bird market. Doxycycline therapy led to rapid clinical improvement, fever resolution and notable radiographic clearance. Therefore, pleural effusion can be a feature of CPP and may indicate more severe disease. mp-tNGS proved rapid and decisive when conventional methods failed, enabling timely targeted therapy. A high index of suspicion combined with mp-tNGS is thus key in accurately diagnosing and improving prognosis.
PUBMED_42749686	PubMed	2026	Reassortment of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza as a Driver for Zoonotic Spillover, Asia. Highly pathogenic avian influenza H5Nx viruses remain a major zoonotic threat, yet global attention has focused largely on clade 2.3.4.4b, potentially overlooking major changes within long-endemic H5N1 lineages in Asia. Recent reports from South and Southeast Asia describe the emergence of reassortant clade 2.3.2.1 viruses alongside renewed human infections after apparent prolonged epidemiologic stability. Collectively, those events suggest a regional pattern rather than isolated anomalies. In this article, we argue that reassortment, rather than point mutation alone, might be an underrecognized driver of zoonotic risk in endemic H5N1 lineages and is reshaping those lineages. We examine why such events might be underrecognized in settings with entrenched poultry influenza, identify limitations of current surveillance systems, and call for integrated, real-time approaches linking genomic detection with phenotypic assessment across animal and human health sectors to enable timely risk assessment and coordinated public health action.
PUBMED_42726526	PubMed	2026	Recent Advances in Solid-State Hydrogen Storage Based on Metal Hydrides and Nanoporous Carbon Materials. Hydrogen is considered one of the most promising energy carriers for sustainable and carbon-neutral energy systems. However, the large-scale deployment of hydrogen technologies is limited by the lack of efficient, safe, and cost-effective hydrogen storage methods. This review examines current hydrogen storage technologies and the physical and chemical mechanisms underlying hydrogen adsorption. Traditional storage approaches, including compressed gas and liquid hydrogen, are briefly analyzed with respect to their advantages, limitations, safety concerns, and energy requirements. Special focus is given to solid-state hydrogen storage systems based on metal hydrides, which offer high storage capacities and enhanced operational safety. Recent advances in intermetallic hydrides, magnesium-based materials and complex hydrides are discussed, along with challenges related to thermodynamic stability, sorption kinetics, thermal management, and cycling durability. This review also highlights recent developments in nanoporous carbon materials and the role of the hydrogen spillover mechanism in improving adsorption performance. Experimental studies reporting hydrogen adsorption capacities above 7 wt.% and up to 11.2 wt.% are analyzed. Based on the reviewed literature, key research directions are identified for optimizing the adsorption properties of advanced materials and accelerating the development of efficient and sustainable hydrogen storage technologies for future energy applications.
PUBMED_42780858	PubMed	2026	Reconstructing the molecular epidemiology of rabies in Switzerland from outbreak to elimination (1967-97). Rabies virus (RABV) is a lethal zoonotic pathogen that remains endemic in some parts of the world despite long-standing vaccination efforts. We present a comprehensive genomic and evolutionary analysis of the sylvatic rabies epidemic in Switzerland (1967-97) and propose a molecular epidemiological framework describing RABV dynamics from emergence to elimination, with relevance for countries pursuing wildlife rabies elimination. We generated almost whole-genome sequences from 88 RABV-positive brain samples collected across 17 Swiss cantons and 13 host species over three decades. Using Illumina sequencing, 76 genomes were recovered at high coverage, enabling robust single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and molecular clock analyses. Phylogenetic reconstruction based on Swiss whole genomes and glycoprotein sequences including additional European strains identified three temporally structured RABV lineages-red (1967-76), blue (1976-88), and green (1984-96)-each consistent with independent introductions from neighbouring countries. Evolutionary analyses indicated a slow substitution rate and predominant purifying selection, with limited adaptive amino-acid change. However, four mutations emerged during the epidemiological peak, suggesting possible modest fitness effects. We found no evidence of major genomic changes associated with cross-species spillovers. Four synonymous variants were underrepresented in carnivore hosts; however, larger datasets may provide stronger evidence for host-associated genetic differences. Genetic divergence showed a strong temporal signal and moderate correlation with geographic distance, consistent with natural and vaccination-induced barriers limiting RABV dispersal, in agreement with the known ecology and control history of the epidemic. These findings provide a genomic framework for understanding sylvatic rabies emergence and elimination and may inform strategies to achieve and sustain the World Health Organization goal of zero human deaths from dog-mediated rabies.
PUBMED_42764265	PubMed	2026	Redefining post-xenotransplantation surveillance: leveraging metagenomic next-generation sequencing to discriminate true pathogen replication from microchimerism-induced false positives. Infection-related risks remain a major concern in xenotransplantation and require continued vigilance as the field progresses toward clinical application. Xenozoonosis is of particular concern, especially in relation to donor-derived porcine viruses such as porcine endogenous retroviruses, porcine cytomegalovirus, porcine lymphotropic herpesviruses, and porcine circoviruses, which are considered significant targets for donor screening and recipient surveillance in clinical xenotransplantation trials. With advances in diagnostic technologies, metagenomic next-generation sequencing may facilitate the detection of unexpected or previously unrecognized pathogens. However, positive molecular findings for donor-derived pathogens should be interpreted cautiously to distinguish microchimerism from true infection in the recipient. Addressing this diagnostic challenge will require complementary assays capable of demonstrating viral integration and replication in recipient-derived human cells, together with expert interpretation by clinicians in the appropriate clinical context. Detailed and tailored surveillance protocols incorporating these advanced methodologies should be developed and validated through well-designed clinical trials, with the resulting evidence guiding their standardization by relevant professional societies and regulatory authorities. These efforts will be essential for the safe and responsible clinical implementation of xenotransplantation.
PUBMED_42765083	PubMed	2026	Reduced susceptibility to triclosan and proposed epidemiological cut-off values for disinfectants and heavy metals in Escherichia coli isolated from Thai tilapia farms: Implications for One Health antimicrobial resistance surveillance. BACKGROUND AND AIM: Tilapia aquaculture systems may act as reservoirs of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) because continuous exposure to antibiotics, disinfectants, and heavy metals can select for resistant bacterial populations. Although Escherichia coli is widely recognized as an indicator organism for monitoring environmental AMR, information on reduced susceptibility to disinfectants and heavy metals in Southeast Asian aquaculture remains limited. Furthermore, epidemiological cut-off values (ECOFFs) for these agents have not been established for E. coli isolated from Thai tilapia farms. This study aimed to characterize the susceptibility of E. coli isolates to disinfectants and heavy metals, propose ECOFFs, and investigate biofilm formation and resistance determinants to improve understanding of AMR ecology in tilapia aquaculture. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 333 E. coli isolates recovered from fish (n 251) and cultivation water (n 82) were investigated. Minimum inhibitory concentrations for five disinfectants and three heavy metals were determined using the agar dilution method, and ECOFFs were estimated using ECOFF Finder software. Biofilm formation was quantified using the tissue culture plate assay. We detected disinfectant- and heavy metal resistance genes by polymerase chain reaction. Principal component analysis was used to classify isolates according to resistance gene profiles, and multivariable logistic regression was performed to identify factors associated with the presence of the class 1 integron gene (int1). RESULTS: A bimodal minimum inhibitory concentration distribution was observed for triclosan, supporting an ECOFF of 0.004 g/mL; 52.6% of isolates exceeded this value, indicating a non-wild-type population with reduced susceptibility. In contrast, benzalkonium chloride, chlorhexidine (CHX), glutaraldehyde, and nitrilotriacetic acid exhibited unimodal distributions consistent with wild-type susceptibility. Among heavy metals, isolates were most susceptible to silver nitrate (minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) 16 g/mL), whereas higher MIC values were observed for copper sulfate (CuSo4) and zinc chloride (ZnCl2). Most isolates (87.7%) exhibited weak biofilm formation, while strong biofilm producers were uncommon and predominantly recovered from cultivation water. Chromosomally encoded efflux pump genes, particularly ydgE (97.9%) and mdfA (92.8%), predominated, whereas plasmid-mediated disinfectant resistance genes were infrequent. Principal component analysis identified four distinct resistance gene clusters, and logistic regression demonstrated significant associations between int1 and several antimicrobial and disinfectant resistance determinants. CONCLUSION: This study proposes the first ECOFFs for triclosan, selected disinfectants, and heavy metals in E. coli isolated from Thai tilapia farms and demonstrates the emergence of non-wild-type isolates with reduced triclosan susceptibility. The predominance of chromosomally encoded efflux pump genes and the observed resistance gene clustering suggest that intrinsic resistance mechanisms contribute substantially to bacterial persistence in aquaculture environments. These findings provide baseline evidence to support routine disinfectant susceptibility monitoring, prudent biocide use, and the integration of aquaculture into One Health AMR surveillance programs.
PUBMED_42780686	PubMed	2026	Reducing referrals in primary care through specialist-supported telehealth: quasi-experimental evidence from Northeast Brazil. BACKGROUND: Synchronous tele-interconsultations - real-time interactions linking primary care physicians and hospital-based specialists - have been proposed as a way to support clinical decision-making and, potentially, to build clinical competencies over time through repeated exposure to specialist reasoning. However, causal evidence on whether such programs reduce reliance on specialist referrals remains limited, particularly in low- and middle-income country settings characterized by large territories and uneven specialist distribution. METHODS: We conducted a quasi-experimental evaluation of the TeleNordeste project, a large-scale telehealth initiative implemented in Northeast Brazilian states under a public-private partnership. Using staggered difference-in-differences methods, our primary aim was to estimate the treatment effect on primary care referral rates, using a panel of primary care units observed from 2018 through 2025. After applying a municipality-level restriction to reduce spillover contamination, the analytical sample comprised 6,825 primary care units: 3,918 never-treated comparison units, 1,002 low-dose units (1-4 cumulative telehealth interactions), and 1,905 high-dose units ( 5 interactions). Secondary analyses explored whether estimated effects were more consistent with immediate care-flow reorganization or workplace learning. RESULTS: Any exposure to the program was associated with a statistically significant reduction in referral rates (-0.356 percentage points, no-covariate specification; p 0.001). Similar estimates were observed across low- and high-exposure groups, with no evidence that effects increased with cumulative exposure. CONCLUSIONS: Participation in the TeleNordeste program was associated with meaningful reductions in referrals to specialized care. Although immediate case resolution during tele-interconsultations provides a plausible explanation for this association, workplace learning cannot be confirmed or excluded with the available data. In the absence of a clear dose-response gradient, these mechanisms cannot be disentangled, and the results indicate that program participation itself can strengthen primary care case resolution and reduce reliance on specialist referrals. Interpretation of mechanisms is limited by potential under-registration of referrals and by the use of primary care units, rather than individual physicians, as the unit of analysis. Future evaluations would benefit from collecting physician-level identifiers and strengthening audits of referral-registration completeness, thereby enabling a more detailed assessment of how tele-interconsultations affect clinical practice and referral decisions over time.
PUBMED_42680313	PubMed	2026	Regional genomic analysis of lineage distribution and transferable multidrug resistance among chicken-associated Salmonella Kentucky isolates in China. Salmonella enterica serovar Kentucky is an important multidrug-resistant foodborne pathogen in the poultry meat supply chain. Although recent broader genomic studies have elucidated the population structure and epidemiological significance of major lineages in China (e.g., ST198 and ST314), the regional dynamics within local poultry supply chains remain insufficiently characterized. In this study, 31 chicken meat-derived isolates from Shanghai and 39 publicly available genomes from China were analyzed using antimicrobial susceptibility testing, whole-genome sequencing, phylogenetic analysis, conjugation experiments, and complete sequencing of representative plasmids. This enabled a systematic characterization of the molecular epidemiological features of the population and the mechanisms underlying resistance dissemination. Population genomic analysis revealed a lineage composition markedly different from the global epidemiological pattern: ST314 was the predominant sequence type among the Shanghai chicken-derived isolates (74.2%), whereas the internationally recognized high-risk clone ST198 accounted for only 25.8% of the local isolates. However, risk stratification analysis indicated that although ST198 was detected less frequently, it carried a significantly greater burden of acquired resistance genes and therefore represented a higher-risk resistant lineage. Functional and structural validation further elucidated the molecular basis of resistance dissemination within this high-risk lineage. Conjugation experiments confirmed the co-transfer of a multidrug resistance module carrying blaTEM-1 and blaCTX-M-267 to the recipient strain Escherichia coli J53. Complete plasmid analysis revealed that these two -lactam resistance genes were co-localized on a 242-kb transferable plasmid flanked by Tn1331, Tn3, and multiple transposase-associated elements, thereby providing a structural basis for their horizontal transfer. This study provides important molecular epidemiological evidence for lineage-specific surveillance and risk-stratified control of resistant Salmonella in the poultry meat supply chain and further underscores the need for continuous monitoring of mobile genetic elements within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42773470	PubMed	2026	Reindeer health and supplementary feeding practices - a survey among herders in Norway and Sweden. BACKGROUND: The well-being, health and nutrition of reindeer (Rangifer tarandus tarandus) and the practice of reindeer husbandry in Fennoscandia are strongly affected by climate change and the loss and fragmentation of pastures. Supplementary feeding has become increasingly common to cope with limited pasture availability, especially to avoid starvation during winters with ice-locked pastures and challenging snow conditions. Increased reliance on feeding shifts traditional reindeer husbandry towards a more farm-like system and raises concerns about changes in reindeer foraging behaviour, increased stress and disease transmission. In this study, a questionnaire was conducted among reindeer herders in Norway and Sweden, to review the extent of supplementary feeding and to explore links between feeding strategies and observations of disease in reindeer. The study also evaluated factors affecting access to and use of veterinary services. RESULTS: A total of 76 respondents, 33 from Norway and 43 from Sweden, participated. Most (87%) had applied supplementary feeding between 2015 and 2021, mainly on free-range pasture, although we observed a non-significant increasing trend in feeding in enclosures during this period. Detailed analysis of the challenging winter of 2019-2020 showed that it was most common to feed a combination of roughage (hay or silage) and pellets, and feeding typically lasted longer than one month. The most frequently reported health issues included parasites, diarrhoea, abortion, and wet belly. Reports of diarrhoea, wet belly, and necrobacillosis were significantly more common in Sweden than in Norway. Multiple correspondence analysis and hierarchical clustering analysis demonstrated an association between feeding in enclosures and diarrhoea. Veterinary services were used by 34% of the respondents for necropsies and 55% for clinical disease management, although many noted barriers such as cost and limited veterinary knowledge and expertise in reindeer health. CONCLUSIONS: Supplementary feeding is widespread in reindeer husbandry in Norway and Sweden. Feeding in enclosures was associated with a higher incidence of diarrhoea. Continued competence building for good management decisions and veterinary services is essential for sustainable reindeer husbandry. An integrated One Health approach is key for the promotion of reindeer health and welfare and in preparedness for transmissible diseases among reindeer, domestic livestock and wildlife.
PUBMED_42672097	PubMed	2026	Repurposing niclosamide ethanolamine for alveolar echinococcosis reveals a disconnect between in vitro efficacy and in vivo outcome in the intraperitoneal infection model. BACKGROUND: Echinococcosis is a zoonotic disease caused by cestodes of the genus Echinococcus. Alveolar echinococcosis (AE), caused by E. multilocularis, primarily affects the liver and shows infiltrative, tumor-like growth of the metacestode stage. If untreated, AE is lethal. AE remains a neglected disease with current treatments based on albendazole or mebendazole that are parasitostatic, and not curative, underscoring the need for more effective therapies. Niclosamide is a chlorinated salicylanilide derivative with proven activities against intestinal helminths but is inactive against tissue-dwelling helminths due to poor absorption and limited bioavailability. In this study, we repurposed niclosamide ethanolamine (NEN), a formulation with improved systemic exposure, for the treatment of E. multilocularis infection in vitro and in vivo. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We assessed the in vitro efficacy of niclosamide and NEN against E. multilocularis metacestode vesicles (IC50 0.2 M) and primary parasite cells (IC50 0.3 M), with active concentrations largely corresponding to NEN levels reachable in the liver. Metabolic analysis suggested that NEN acts as a mitochondrial uncoupler. Electron microscopy showed that NEN-treatments induced profound structural damage in the metacestode vesicle tissue, but mitochondrial ultrastructure was not notably affected. In mice intraperitoneally infected with E. multilocularis, NEN was orally administered during 9 weeks either alone, or in combination with albendazole. Pharmacokinetic analyses showed that NEN reached blood level concentrations above 1 M. However, the parasite burden in NEN-treated mice was not significantly reduced under the conditions used in this study. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Although niclosamide and NEN demonstrated potent activity against E. multilocularis in vitro, this efficacy did not translate in the mouse model. The lack of in vivo activity could be attributed to several factors such as infection model, limited drug uptake by the parasite in the animal, or the rapid metabolization of the compound. Future studies should explore novel niclosamide derivatives and formulations to enhance efficacy against AE in vivo.
PUBMED_42725043	PubMed	2026	Respiratory pandemic risk in the Anthropocene: A One Health framework and GISRS+ agenda. Recent epidemics and pandemics caused by respiratory viruses, alongside the animal panzootic spread of highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5Nx), have become a structural feature of the Anthropocene, yet responses remain largely reactive. This review integrates findings from WHO's Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) and related surveillance data (2000-2024), epidemiological studies of influenza A virus, SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, and H5Nx, and One Health literature. We examine major groups of respiratory viruses and identify mismatches between risk and surveillance by focusing on spillover potential from animal hosts, human-to-human transmission and its controllability, and Anthropocene characteristics that increase epidemic risk. The analysis indicated that SARS-related coronaviruses and influenza A viruses, particularly H5Nx, are among the leading candidates based on currently available evidence because they have large reservoirs in animal hosts and spillover to humans is highly probable. The previous presymptomatic spread of SARS-CoV-2 and recent mammalian adaptation in H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b highlight limitations of the traditional symptom-based and pathogen-specific surveillance system. Spillover events tend to occur in tropical and subtropical regions in low- and middle-income countries, but most genomic surveillance is in high-income countries. We propose interventions that address the upstream, midstream, downstream processes of epidemics. Upstream interventions are primary prevention measures related to land use, livestock, wildlife, and urban environments; midstream interventions are GISRS+-based pathogen-agnostic genomic and metagenomic early warning systems triggered by One Health; and downstream interventions include vaccines, antivirals, non-pharmaceutical interventions, and engineering with equity-centred global governance and sustainable financing.
PUBMED_42703479	PubMed	2026	Retrospective Analysis of Chronic Q Fever Cases at a Tertiary Care Center From 2007 to 2023. BACKGROUND: Chronic Q fever, caused by Coxiella burnetii, presents significant diagnostic and management challenges due to its variable presentation and high morbidity, especially among patients with underlying cardiac or vascular disease. In the United States, cases are rising, often without identifiable exposures, and diagnostic delays remain common. METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cohort study of chronic Q fever cases at the Mayo Clinic from 2007 to 2023. Patients with clinical evidence and a phase I IgG titer 1:1024 and/or positive polymerase chain reaction for C burnetii were included. Data were abstracted from electronic health records, including demographics, exposures, clinical manifestations, diagnostics, treatments, and outcomes. Statistical analyses assessed factors influencing diagnostic delay and treatment response. RESULTS: We identified 33 patients with chronic Q fever (median age 56; 88% male). Median time to diagnosis was 99 days, with 11.4 days between infectious diseases evaluation and diagnosis. Animal exposure was reported in 17 patients (52%), while 8 (24%) had no identifiable exposure. Patients primarily presented with prosthetic valve endocarditis (n 14, 42%) or vascular graft infection (n 9, 27%). The majority were treated with doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine (n 25, 75%), and 14 patients (42%) required surgical intervention. Mortality attributable to chronic Q fever was 6% (n 2). CONCLUSIONS: Chronic Q fever remains under-recognized, with substantial diagnostic delays prior to treatment. Cardiovascular infection predominates, and surgical intervention is often required despite prolonged antimicrobial therapy. Early specialist evaluation and standardized diagnostic pathways may improve outcomes.
PUBMED_42712699	PubMed	2026	Ribotyping for Accurate Identification of Infectious Bacteria in Animal-Derived Foods and Laboratory Samples: Implications for Human Health. Ribotyping is a molecular typing approach based on ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequences for the identification and characterization of bacterial strains. This review aims to evaluate the effectiveness of ribotyping in the identification of infectious bacteria in animal-derived foods and veterinary samples. A narrative literature review was conducted using major scientific databases, including PubMed, Scopus, Google Scholar, and Web of Science, covering studies published to 2025. Relevant articles were selected based on their focus on ribotyping methodologies (e.g., RFLP-, PCR-, and automated ribotyping) and their applications in food safety, veterinary microbiology, and zoonotic disease investigations. The findings indicate that ribotyping has been widely applied for epidemiological investigations, source tracking, and characterization of foodborne and zoonotic pathogens. These approaches have contributed to understanding bacterial diversity and monitoring antibiotic resistance patterns in animal populations and related food products. However, compared with high-resolution molecular techniques such as whole genome sequencing (WGS), ribotyping demonstrates lower discriminatory power and limited resolution for fine-scale epidemiological analysis. Despite these limitations, ribotyping remains a useful, accessible, and cost-effective tool in certain laboratory and surveillance settings, particularly where advanced genomic technologies are not readily available. Overall, integrating ribotyping with newer genomic approaches can enhance the monitoring and control of infectious bacteria, thereby supporting animal health, food safety, and public health outcomes.
PUBMED_42696224	PubMed	2026	Robotic-assisted transbronchial biopsy versus computed tomography-guided transthoracic needle biopsy for peripheral pulmonary lesions: a systematic review and meta-analysis of direct comparative studies. Robotic-assisted bronchoscopy (RAB) and computed tomography-guided transthoracic biopsy (CTTB) are competing strategies for sampling peripheral pulmonary lesions (PPLs). Whether they differ in yield or safety is uncertain. To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review restricted to direct comparisons. We searched MEDLINE, Europe PMC, Scopus, Web of Science and ClinicalTrials.gov from inception to 7 July 2026 for studies directly comparing RAB with CTTB in adults with PPLs. The primary outcome was strict 2024 American Thoracic Society/American College of Chest Physicians diagnostic yield. Risk of bias was assessed with ROBINS-I and certainty with GRADE. A cohort-genealogy step identified, per outcome, the largest set of cohorts sharing no patients; only that set was pooled, with Hartung-Knapp and Mantel-Haenszel sensitivity analyses. Five retrospective studies from one US health system were eligible. Four share patients; at most three cohorts are mutually independent. Across those three, diagnostic yield was comparable (risk ratio RR 0.99, 95% confidence interval CI 0.93-1.06; I 24%; Hartung-Knapp 0.87-1.13), with an identical relative effect under strict and intermediate definitions although absolute yields fell from 88% to 74-84% under strict criteria. Pneumothorax requiring a chest tube and/or admission was about three-quarters less frequent with RAB across all three cohorts (RR 0.25, 95% CI 0.14-0.46; I 0%; Hartung-Knapp 0.07-0.96). Strict yield (RR 0.99) and any pneumothorax (RR 0.06) were reported by two cohorts each and neither survives the few-studies correction. RAB took about 50 min longer than CTTB where same-session staging endobronchial ultrasound was counted in the robotic time, but only about 8 min longer than CTTB where it was not. Only one cohort reported yield by lesion size category and none reported yield by bronchus sign or lung zone, so lesion-level subgroups could not be pooled. Certainty was low for pleural complications and very low elsewhere. Low-certainty evidence indicates that RAB is associated with fewer pleural complications, with no statistically detectable difference in diagnostic yield; equivalence was not formally established. Because all evidence is retrospective, confined to one health system, and almost never stratified by lesion size or accessibility, these findings are hypothesis-generating and require a multicenter randomized trial.
PUBMED_42751066	PubMed	2026	Role of biosecurity practices in antimicrobial use on commercial poultry farms: One health implications for AMR mitigation in Bangladesh. The indiscriminate use of antimicrobials in food-producing animals is a major contributor to antimicrobial resistance (AMR), a global One Health challenge that threatens the interconnected health of humans, animals, and ecosystems. Hence, this study conducted to assess the association between farm-level biosecurity practices and antimicrobial use in commercial poultry farms in Bangladesh. A cross-sectional study was conducted on 331 poultry farms (broiler: 113, layer: 103, Sonali: 115) across six districts from September to December 2021. A directed acyclic graph informed variable selection and generalized linear models (GLM) and least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) regression were used to identify factors associated with antimicrobial use. Overall, 27.8% of farms reported antibiotic use on the day of the interview, and 49.2% had used antibiotics in the preceding 14 days. Antimicrobial use was significantly higher in rural farms and those with dirt floors or floor-based rearing systems. Higher odds of antimicrobial use were also linked to farmer education level, proximity to recent avian influenza outbreaks, unrestricted access of wild animal, and nearby crow roost. Conversely, farms implementing stronger biosecurity including isolating sick birds, and farms rearing layer birds and maintaining improved infrastructure reported significantly lower antibiotic use. These findings indicate that farm infrastructure, wildlife interfaces and hygiene practices are important correlates of antimicrobial use. Strengthening farm-level biosecurity, regulating antimicrobial access, and expanding veterinary extension services, especially in rural areas are critical to reduce antibiotic dependency and mitigating AMR risks. Establishing a national AMR surveillance framework that links animal, environmental, and human health sectors is essential to monitor resistance patterns and guide targeted policy interventions.
PUBMED_42766177	PubMed	2026	Role of extended-spectrum -lactamase (ESBL) genes in the dissemination of -lactam resistance within aquatic environments: mechanisms, persistence, and one health implications. Antimicrobial resistance of pathogenic bacteria has rapidly increased over the past 20 years, creating a major global health threat. Extended-spectrum -lactamases (ESBLs) are major drivers of resistance to -lactam antibiotics, hydrolyzing broad-spectrum cephalosporines and monobactams. ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae are widespread across aquatic environments. While previous reviews have broadly described clinical ESBL epidemiology, a comprehensive synthesis explicitly linking aquatic microenvironmental niches, mobile genetic element dynamics, and environmental selection mechanisms remains lacking. This review addresses this gap by critically evaluating how aquatic environments function as active evolutionary reactors rather than mere passive sinks. The dissemination of these ESBL genes depends on conjugative plasmids, insertion sequences, and transposons. Specifically, insertion sequence ISEcp1 mobilizes and enhances the expression of blaCTX-M genes through transposition and strong promoter activity, while IS26 promotes the capture, rearrangement and accumulation of multi-drug resistance determinants within plasmids and transposons. ESBL genes persist in both intracellular and extracellular forms within sediments, biofilms, and microplastic-associated habitats. This review describes the prevalence, mobility, dissemination mechanisms, and environmental-clinical connectivity of ESBL determinants in aquatic systems.
PUBMED_42741289	PubMed	2026	Rural revitalization, carbon emissions, and infectious disease transmission in China: nonlinear dynamics, spatial spillovers, and moderating effect. Atmospheric pollution, particularly carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions driven by rapid economic development, poses significant threats to public health. In China, rural revitalization policies have transformed rural environments and socioeconomic structures, with implications for infectious disease transmission. This study examines the relationship between carbon emissions, rural revitalization, and infectious diseases using panel data from 31 provinces (2013-2023) within a spatial econometric framework. Results show that carbon emissions significantly increase disease transmission. Rural Revitalization exhibits a significant U-shaped non-linear effect, shifting from an initial negative impact that suppresses infection risks to a subsequent positive impact that elevates risks driven by enhanced population mobility and economic integration. Spatial Durbin Model reveals profound positive spatial spillover effects, demonstrating that both Carbon Emissions and Infectious Disease Transmission are highly interdependent across neighboring provinces. This indicates that a region's epidemiological risk is heavily conditioned by the transboundary environmental pressures and developmental trajectories of its contiguous territories. These findings underscore that coordinating environmental and rural development policies through a transition toward stage-dependent, low-carbon rural planning and cross-regional collaborative governance is a vital prerequisite for mitigating public health expenditures and safeguarding long-term regional sustainability.
PUBMED_42765042	PubMed	2026	Salmonella Abortusequi-associated abortions in horses: Global epidemiology, diagnostic advances, prevention, antimicrobial resistance, and emerging control strategies.
PUBMED_42723767	PubMed	2026	Scaling Lassa Virus Dynamics within Anthropogenic Ecosystems (SCAPES) Study Protocol: a mixed-methods observational cohort study of humans, rodents, and landscapes in Nigeria. INTRODUCTION: Zoonotic spillover driven by human activity remains a critical challenge to human health. Research focusing on disease ecology or human-animal interactions provides detailed local insights, but these findings are often siloed and disconnected from global processes and policy. Broad-scale maps of predicted disease risk are more commonly used to inform decisions, yet their connection to local-scale drivers of pathogen transmission remains poorly understood. This study bridges these gaps through a cross-scale study of Lassa fever, a rodent-borne haemorrhagic fever of public health significance in West Africa and a WHO priority pathogen. We use a fine-scale quantitative and participatory modelling approach that explicitly integrates into broad-scale risk models to identify the patterns and processes that drive spillover within human-driven ecosystems. Lassa fever epidemics are dominated by endemic and seasonal transmission of Mammarenavirus lassaense (LASV) from rodent reservoirs to humans within a rural context, positioning LASV as a uniquely tractable system in which to study zoonotic spillover. METHODS AND ANALYSIS: We describe parallel longitudinal observational studies of humans, rodents, and landscapes that are explicitly designed to feed into a cross-scale quantitative modelling framework. By integrating data on landcover, rodent dynamics, human behavior, and LASV infection, we examine how anthropogenic activities shape LASV ecology and human exposure. These data will inform spatial models of the human-rodent-LASV interface to predict key drivers of human exposure risk. Emergent patterns from these models will then be integrated into an existing broad-scale regression-based risk model, extending fine scale mechanism to regional prediction. Together, our empirical research and model predictions will clarify how zoonotic risk propagates from local to regional scales, providing evidence to inform disease management efforts for Lassa fever and zoonotic spillover more broadly.
PUBMED_42730521	PubMed	2026	Scaling Up Wildlife Health Surveillance: Lessons from the Transition of Focal Marsh Deer (Blastocerus dichotomus) Mortality Monitoring to Integrated Surveillance in Protected Areas of Argentina. Landscapes of the Anthropocene, increasingly shaped by deforestation, climate change, and productive activities, are key settings for pathogen emergence and re-emergence. In this context, wildlife health surveillance is critical for early detection and risk mitigation. We describe the development, implementation, and operational outcomes of an integrated wildlife health surveillance system in protected areas of Argentina between 2022 and 2025, following its transition from marsh deer (Blastocerus dichotomus) mortality monitoring to a multispecies framework. The system integrated participatory, passive, and active surveillance modalities, with participatory surveillance functioning as a cross-cutting component supporting both mortality event detection and field implementation. The participatory network involved 110 members and was strengthened through training, standardized protocols, and field-based collaboration. Passive surveillance documented 205 records of wildlife morbidity and mortality, structured through three complementary reporting channels: surveillance network reports, wildlife rescue centers, and research team detections. Active surveillance focused on Ehrlichia chaffeensis and Theileria cervi, combining standardized grid-based sampling with complementary sampling of domestic dogs and environmental matrices. Grid-based sampling integrated rodent trapping, tick dragging, and camera trapping within a unified spatial design, yielding 471 rodents, 696 questing ticks, and records of 14 mammal species. Additional components included 185 domestic dogs sampled in one peri-protected area and 263 environmental samples across multiple matrices. System performance varied across implementation contexts, shaped by territorial presence of personnel, local infrastructure, and continuity of field activities. Integration of surveillance modalities enabled coordinated workflows, strengthened interinstitutional collaboration, and improved sample use efficiency across concurrent research efforts, expanding detection capacity, enhancing sample quality, and reducing redundant animal handling. The diagnostic network incorporated 12 institutions supporting coordinated sample processing. This study provides an operational framework for integrated wildlife health surveillance in resource-limited settings, highlighting the role of participatory approaches and the importance of institutional support, local capacity, and sustained engagement for long-term sustainability and consolidation of existing surveillance programs under a One Health perspective.
PUBMED_42781536	PubMed	2026	Scoping review of public health emergency management training programmes and curricula in Africa (2000-2025): implications for policy, practice and research. OBJECTIVES: This study mapped the landscape of public health emergency management (PHEM) training programmes and curricula in Africa from 2000 to 2025 to identify trends, strengths and persistent gaps. DESIGN: The study was conducted following the Arksey and O'Malley framework, refined by Levac et al, and reported in line with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) guidelines. DATA SOURCES: A comprehensive search of peer-reviewed databases, including Ovid MEDLINE, PubMed, Scopus and CINAHL, was conducted in September 2025. Additional non-indexed resources were obtained from organisational repositories and websites of regional public health organisations, African Journals Online and Google Scholar. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Peer-reviewed articles, technical reports, theses and organisational publications published between 2000 and 2025 that described the design, delivery, implementation or evaluation of PHEM training programmes in Africa were included in the study. DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Data were extracted using a standardised form capturing programme characteristics, competencies, delivery modalities, evaluation methods, outcomes and challenges. Qualitative data were analysed thematically and mapped against the review objectives. RESULTS: Of 334 records identified, 32 met the inclusion criteria. Training initiatives ranged from short courses to fellowships and degree programmes, with a predominant focus on epidemic management. Critical domains such as leadership, humanitarian response, One Health, diagnostics and gender equity were under-represented. Few programmes reported formal competency assessments or long-term evaluation outcomes. Key challenges identified included reliance on donor funding, weak institutional ownership, poor integration with academic systems and limited sustainability. Emerging needs included training in the Prevention of Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment, the use of digital health technologies and integration of the humanitarian-development-peace nexus. CONCLUSION: PHEM training in Africa remains heavily oriented towards epidemic response, with insufficient emphasis on complex emergencies. Strengthening workforce resilience requires comprehensive and sustainably financed curricula.
PUBMED_42745448	PubMed	2026	Screening for Orthoflavivirus RNA in Bats from Urban and Rural Landscapes of Guayas Province, Ecuador. BACKGROUND: Orthoflaviviruses are arthropod-borne viruses of major importance for human and animal health. In Ecuador, surveillance has focused on human cases and mosquito vectors, and evidence from wildlife remains scarce. This study screened bats from Guayas Province for orthoflavivirus RNA and examined whether positivity was associated with host taxon, landscape, or sex. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted using liver tissue from bats captured during 19 nocturnal mist-netting sessions at 10 localities in Guayas Province between October 2020 and May 2024. Total RNA was extracted and analyzed by a generic nested RT-PCR assay targeting a conserved region of the NS5 gene, with -actin amplification as an internal control. A total of 128 samples yielded valid results. Prevalence was reported with Wilson 95% confidence intervals (CIs), and associations were assessed by bivariate tests and multivariable logistic regression. RESULTS: Twenty-five of 128 bats (19.5%; 95% CI: 13.6-27.2) were positive in the generic NS5 assay. In bivariate analysis, positivity was higher in urban than rural bats (40.0% vs. 13.3%; odds ratio OR 4.36, 95% CI: 1.71-11.10; p 0.0029). However, all 30 urban bats were Molossus molossus, and after adjustment for host taxon the landscape association disappeared (adjusted OR: 0.99, 95% CI: 0.31-3.14), whereas M. molossus remained strongly associated with positivity (adjusted OR: 15.61, 95% CI: 3.79-64.21; p 0.001). Within M. molossus, positivity was identical in rural and urban settings (40.0% vs. 40.0%; p 1.000). Sequencing could not be completed because of low template yield. CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide presumptive evidence of flavivirus-like RNA in bats from coastal Ecuador, concentrated in one synanthropic insectivorous species rather than distributed along an urban-rural gradient. Because the products could not be sequenced, no specific orthoflavivirus can be identified. Wildlife merits inclusion in integrated arbovirus surveillance under a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42684511	PubMed	2026	Seasonal synchrony inflates spatial dependence in water-quality Markov chains: evidence from a fine-scale agricultural wetland. Spatial Markov chains are increasingly used to infer spatial dependence among water-quality monitoring sites, usually from raw records retaining the common seasonal signal. We tested whether that dependence reflects interaction between sites or synchrony to a shared seasonal driver. Classic and spatial Markov chains were applied to full-year monthly water-quality index (WQI) records from eight connected sites in a Taihu-basin agricultural wetland (2023-2025, 288 site-months). On raw data, a site's transitions depended significantly on its neighbours' state (p 0.038), but the own-versus-neighbour state table was near-degenerate, 22% of its cells near-empty, because synchrony kept each site and its neighbours in the same state. After deseasonalization, the table was fully populated and the dependence was no longer detectable (p 0.60). The reversal held across six spatial-weight specifications (deseasonalized p 0.25-0.96, against 0.0002-0.077 on raw data) and was corroborated by a Moran ladder (pooled Moran's I 0.80 to -0.11; spatial-autoregressive 0.70 to -0.16). A two-way variance decomposition attributed 81.6% of WQI variance to time and 7.9% to site, while the production season opened a direct Good-to-Poor collapse channel absent in winter. A power analysis places the design's detection limit at a conditional-matrix deviation of about 0.19, above the deseasonalized value of 0.09, so weak spatial interaction cannot be excluded. The apparent dependence is therefore attributable largely to seasonal synchrony, the Moran effect, rather than to spillover. Such models should be deseasonalized, and their table sparsity and detection limit reported, before their dependence is read as spatial process.
PUBMED_42685734	PubMed	2026	Sepsis, endemic and emerging infectious diseases: converging concepts and clinical implications. Studies on the global burden of sepsis confirm its major mortality, morbidity, and societal impact, with 85% of cases and deaths occurring in low-income and middle-income countries. Importantly, these analyses have blurred the boundaries between sepsis, defined as a dysregulated host response to infection causing life-threatening organ dysfunction, and endemic and emerging infectious diseases, such as malaria, leptospirosis, tuberculosis, and gastroenteric illnesses, which often follow clinical trajectories distinct from those of so-called standard sepsis. Framing these disease-specific deaths within the broader context of sepsis highlights the unacceptably high mortality from preventable and treatable endemic infectious diseases in resource-limited settings. However, important differences remain. Sepsis management focuses on early diagnosis, timely intervention, organ support, and, increasingly, patient stratification and precision-targeted therapies. In contrast, endemic and emerging infectious diseases often involve lengthy and complex courses before hospital admission and require disease-specific diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. In this Personal View, we discuss how this conceptual overlap affects estimates of disease burden, interpretation of pathophysiological mechanisms, therapeutic decision making, and the development of precision medicine strategies. We propose applying disease-specific stratification to endemic and emerging infectious diseases to distinguish milder cases from life-threatening forms associated with organ dysfunction (sepsis from an endemic and emerging infectious disease SEEID ). Early recognition and diagnosis of SEEIDs are essential, and expert disease-specific guidance is urgently needed, particularly given the scarcity of randomised clinical trials evaluating treatment strategies for these conditions.
PUBMED_42711694	PubMed	2026	Sero-epidemiological survey of Toxoplasma gondii in water buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) and domestic pig (Sus scrofa domesticus) across upper and lower Egypt. BACKGROUND: Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii) is a globally prevalent protozoan parasite affecting warm-blooded species, including humans. In Egypt, serological surveys have been conducted in several livestock; however, studies on species such as buffalo and pigs remain scarce. This study aimed to provide updated insights into the seroprevalence of T. gondii in a cohort of 548 domestic animals, comprising 288 water buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis), sampled from both Upper and Lower Egypt, and 260 domestic pigs (Sus scrofa domesticus) from Lower Egypt between January and December 2023. Serological screening for anti-T. gondii antibodies was performed using the Modified Agglutination Test (MAT). Furthermore, the investigation evaluated the influence of various individual factors, including sex, age, season, and geographic origin, on the likelihood of exposure to the parasite in these understudied host species. Likewise, this work comprehensively reviews all previous research on the serosurveys of T. gondii in water buffalo and domestic pigs across Upper and Lower Egypt, with findings systematically tabulated to provide an updated and consolidated overview of the available evidence about this topic. RESULTS: The overall seroprevalence of T. gondii in buffalo was 42.01% (121/288; 95% Confidence Interval (95%CI): 36.31- 47.71). The Generalized Estimating Equation model identified geographic location as a significant risk factor for T. gondii exposure in buffalo, where buffalo from Lower Egypt showing 3.69-fold higher odds of seropositivity compared to those from Upper Egypt, highlighting increased circulation of the parasite in northern areas. Seroprevalence was significantly higher in pigs (68.46%; 178/260; 95%CI: 62.81-74.11) than in buffalo. However, no significant associations were found between seropositivity and the evaluated epidemiological variables in this species. CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate high T. gondii exposure in Egyptian buffalo and pigs, indicating continued transmission and zoonotic danger. Biosecurity measures must be strengthened, cat access reduced, sanitation enhanced, herd screening performed on a regular basis, and farmers educated. One Health surveillance and additional field research should lead effective control and lessen the public health effects. reveal substantial exposure to T. gondii in both buffalo and pigs in Egypt and highlight the need for targeted control strategies, including improved husbandry and biosecurity practices, routine animal screening, and farmer education, to reduce transmission risk in livestock and protect public health.
PUBMED_42730531	PubMed	2026	Serologic Investigation of Leptospira spp., Sarcocystis neurona, and Toxoplasma gondii in Guadalupe Fur Seals (Arctocephalus townsendi) from Guadalupe Island, Mexico. The Guadalupe fur seal (GFS; Arctocephalus townsendi) is susceptible to the ecologic impacts of anomalous ocean warming events, which have led to prey scarcity that, in turn, affects its feeding habits, nutritional condition, and survival at Guadalupe Island, Mexico. Concurrently, ocean warming has also caused increased outbreaks of zoonotic diseases in North Pacific pinnipeds. This study assessed the exposure to zoonotic disease agents (Leptospira spp., Sarcocystis neurona, and Toxoplasma gondii) in GFS on Guadalupe Island (2016, 2017, and 2020), during a period of persistent ocean warming and unusual strandings in Mexico and the USA. Blood samples were collected from 129 GFS (82 females and 47 males) at Guadalupe Island. All tested GFS were seronegative for Leptospira spp. and S. neurona, whereas 17/129 (13%) tested seropositive for T. gondii, predominantly pups (1 yr) of both sexes. Although T. gondii was only detected in a relatively small proportion of GFS at Guadalupe Island, the parasite is frequently reported in pinniped populations inhabiting coastal ecosystems worldwide. Currently, the GFS population is increasing, which may promote range expansion and increase interaction with other marine mammals that may carry zoonotic pathogens along the coastal ecosystems of the northeastern Pacific Ocean. Only GFS pups were seropositive for T. gondii, which may reflect a passive transfer of maternal antibodies during lactation. However, the low prevalence observed may also indicate limited environmental exposure or other ecologic factors. As on other islands, exotic invasive species are reported in Guadalupe Island, which cannot be discounted as a possible source of exposure of GFS to pathogens and parasites such as T. gondii.
PUBMED_42738480	PubMed	2026	Seroprevalence and Factors Associated with Toxoplasma gondii Seropositivity in Small Ruminants in Northeastern Portugal. Toxoplasma gondii infection is relevant to animal production, food safety, and public health, but current epidemiological data for small ruminants in northeastern Portugal are limited. This cross-sectional study estimated seroprevalence and investigated factors associated with seropositivity in 2678 animals from 149 flocks sampled between May 2022 and December 2024. Serum samples were tested using an indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and associated factors were evaluated using mixed-effects logistic regression with flock as a random effect. The overall true seroprevalence was estimated at 21.5% (apparent seroprevalence: 21.6%). At the flock level, 83.9% (125/149) of the sampled flocks were seropositive. True seroprevalence was higher in sheep than in goats (23.4% versus 14.4%), and seropositivity was detected in all surveyed municipalities. In the multivariable model, higher odds of seropositivity were observed in sheep (adjusted odds ratio 1.74), adult animals (2.78), non-native breeds (1.84), animals not kept in permanent housing (3.16), and animals from farms with cats (1.69). These findings indicate exposure throughout the surveyed area and associations with both host-related and farm-level characteristics. Strengthening farm biosecurity, limiting contamination of feed and water, and integrating animal health, environmental, and food safety measures may contribute to prevention within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42772043	PubMed	2026	Seroprevalence and associated epidemiological drivers of glanders in horses: a systematic review and meta-analysis (2002-2026). Glanders (malleus), a highly contagious zoonotic disease caused by Burkholderia mallei, remains an important transboundary disease of equids despite extensive control efforts in many countries. However, its epidemiological patterns and associated drivers have not been comprehensively synthesized. This study aimed to estimate the seroprevalence of glanders in horses and identify key epidemiological drivers based on studies published up to April 27, 2026. Following PRISMA 2020 guidelines, systematic searches were conducted in PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, ScienceDirect, Cochrane Library, ProQuest, and Google Scholar. Study quality was assessed using the Joanna Briggs Institute checklist for prevalence studies. Random-effects meta-analyses, subgroup analyses, meta-regression, and publication bias assessments were performed using RStudio version 4.4.3. Twenty studies met the inclusion criteria. The pooled seroprevalence of glanders in horses was estimated at 3.02% (95% CI: 0.82-6.36). Glanders was reported predominantly in South Asia and South America, with the highest prevalence estimates observed in French Guiana and Iraq. ELISA was the most frequently employed diagnostic method. Higher prevalence estimates were observed during the rainy season and in animals with poor body condition. Meta-regression analysis revealed a temporally increasing trend in glanders seroprevalence in horses. Strengthened surveillance, harmonised diagnostics, and targeted control strategies are essential to reduce the disease burden and mitigate further re-emergence.
PUBMED_42713702	PubMed	2026	Seroprevalence of Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever Virus (CCHFV) in Cattle and Abattoir Workers at Dagoretti Slaughterhouse in Kenya. INTRODUCTION: Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever Virus (CCHFV) is a tick-borne virus of significant public health concern, especially in endemic regions such as East Africa. Despite its zoonotic potential, there is a paucity of data on its occurrence and risk factors among high-risk populations in Kenya. This study aimed to determine the seroprevalence of CCHFV among cattle and workers at an abattoir, and to characterize putative risk factors and CCHF spatial distribution in Kenya. METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study testing 366 cattle from Dagoretti slaughterhouses and 313 archived human serum samples for anti-CCHFV antibodies using the ID Screen CCHF Double Antigen Multispecies ELISA kit. For cattle, we collected metadata on source counties, sex, ownership, body condition score and breed, while for human participants, additional metadata included occupational exposures, safety and health training and personal protective equipment use. We used multivariable logistic regression to examine the association between seropositivity and potential risk factors and choropleth maps to visualize cattle seropositivity across source counties. RESULTS: The overall CCHFV seroprevalence was 42.6% (95% CI: 37.7%, 47.9%) in cattle and 4.8% (95% CI: 2.7%, 7.8%) in slaughterhouse workers. Among cattle, seroprevalence was highest in animals from pastoral counties (43.8%, 95% CI: 37.9%, 49.9%) and among crossbreeds (52.4%, 95% CI: 29.8%, 74.3%). In humans, seropositivity was slightly higher in males (5.2%, 95% CI: 2.7%, 9.0%) and older age groups (7.4%, 95% CI: 3.7%, 12.8%). Use of overalls was significantly associated with reduced odds of seropositivity (aOR 0.199, 95% CI: 0.051-0.978, p 0.027). Spatial analysis revealed high seroprevalence in cattle originating from arid and semi-arid counties. CONCLUSIONS: High CCHFV seroprevalence in cattle indicates its endemicity in pastoral regions and the associated risks to communities due to their unique sociocultural practices. Furthermore, these findings reveal an increased occupational risk for abattoir workers from the silent circulation of CCHF. Our results underscore the importance of abattoir-based surveillance and highlight the need for targeted interventions through a One Health approach.
PUBMED_42762776	PubMed	2026	Sertoli cell oxidative stress as a convergent hazard endpoint for environmental toxicants: A systematic review, meta-analysis, and AOP-based assessment. Environmental chemical exposures are primary drivers of declining male reproductive health. Sertoli cells (SCs), indispensable for spermatogenesis and blood-testis barrier (BTB) integrity, are preferential targets for toxicant-induced oxidative injury across chemically diverse classes. We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis organised around an a priori Adverse Outcome Pathway (AOP): toxicant interaction with SC mitochondria or NADPH oxidases (Molecular Initiating Event) ROS elevation (Key Event 1, KE1) SC cellular dysfunction including apoptosis, ferroptosis, and BTB disruption (Key Event 2, KE2) impaired spermatogenesis (Adverse Outcome). Searching PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, and Scopus from inception to January 2026, we identified 1458 records, of which 96 met inclusion criteria for qualitative synthesis and 29 provided extractable data for meta-analysis. All six chemical classes examined - air pollutants (PM2.5), endocrine-disrupting chemicals, pesticides, heavy metals, mycotoxins, and emerging contaminants - significantly elevated SC oxidative stress relative to controls. Metals produced the largest pooled standardised mean difference (SMD 2.0) and air pollutants the second largest (SMD 1.8). The direction of effect was uniformly positive across all 29 studies. Cross-study ecological regression supported the AOP linkage between ROS elevation (KE1) and SC apoptosis (KE2; R2 0.77, p 0.001). One Health subgroup analysis showed directionally consistent effect sizes across rodent, livestock, and in vitro evidence streams. These findings position SC oxidative stress as a convergent, chemically non-specific, and phylogenetically conserved hazard endpoint warranting formalisation within tiered reproductive toxicity test strategies.
PUBMED_42753832	PubMed	2026	Silent carriage of tigecycline- and carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella quasipneumoniae co-harbouring tetX(4) and blaNDM-1 in healthy individuals in China. OBJECTIVES: To investigate the occurrence and genomic characteristics of tigecycline- and carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella quasipneumoniae isolated from healthy individuals in China. METHODS: During a nationwide screening programme, faecal samples from healthy community individuals were cultured for carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing, whole-genome sequencing and conjugation assays were performed for two K. quasipneumoniae isolates co-harbouring tet(X4) and blaNDM-1. RESULTS: Two K. quasipneumoniae strains carrying tet(X4) and blaNDM-1 were recovered from healthy individuals without recent hospitalisation or antibiotic exposure. Both isolates showed resistance to tigecycline ( 8 g/mL) and carbapenems ( 4 g/mL). Genomic analysis demonstrated close clonal relatedness between the isolates (ST6460-1LV, KL151). The blaNDM-1 gene was located on an IncX3 plasmid associated with mobile genetic elements, whereas tet(X4) was carried by an IncX1 plasmid. Conjugation assays confirmed successful transfer of both resistance genes, which frequently co-transferred into recipient strains. CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first report of K. quasipneumoniae co-harbouring tet(X4) and blaNDM-1 in healthy individuals in China. The findings indicate that healthy community populations may serve as a hidden reservoir for last-resort antimicrobial resistance genes and underscore the importance of community-based surveillance within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42711753	PubMed	2026	Site-Specific Functioning of CuN3-PdS3 Janus Dual-Atom Sites Enable Near-Unity Faradaic Efficiency for Nitrate Electroreduction to Ammonia. Electrochemical nitrate reduction reaction (NO3RR) using renewable electricity offers a carbon-free and energy-saving route to remediating nitrate-polluted wastewater while producing ammonia (NH3). However, conventional catalysts for NO3RR suffer from strong adsorption of NOx intermediates that hinders further hydrogenation, resulting in diminished selectivity and catalyst deactivation. Here we construct a Janus-type CuN3-PdS3 dual-atom catalyst featuring N/S dual bridging, namely CuPd-SNC, to enable decoupled NOx species adsorption and hydrogen supply for hydrogenation on Cu and Pd sites, respectively. Excitingly, CuPd-SNC delivers a near-unity Faradaic efficiency of 99.58% for NH3 synthesis and a production rate of 1.34 mmol h-1 cm-2. When integrated into a Zn-nitrate battery, CuPd-SNC achieves a maximum power density of 13.0 mW cm-2 and demonstrates stable operation for 160 h. In situ spectroscopic and theoretical analyses reveal the site-specific functionalities of the CuN3-PdS3 Janus configuration, wherein Cu sites markedly enhance the adsorption/activation of NOx - intermediates, Pd sites enable continuous proton supply and reduce the energy barriers for multi-step NOx hydrogenation, while N/S dual bridges serve as a proton reservoir. These findings highlight the site-specific but complementary functioning of dual-atom catalysts in synergistically pushing the limit of conventional electrocatalysts, offering fundamental insights into the rational catalyst design for NH3 synthesis.
PUBMED_42699671	PubMed	2026	Six years of One Health action in Africa: evaluating outcomes, mechanisms, and lessons from OHRECA (2020-2025). BACKGROUND: There is growing momentum towards using One Health approaches to address health threats emerging when human activities come in close contact with animals and shared environments. In Africa, where the burden of such threats is disproportionately high, strengthening One Health capacity is important for improving health system preparedness. Although substantial investments have been made in One Health capacity building across low- and middle-income countries, there remains limited evidence on how such initiatives achieve sustainable outcomes and the conditions that enable their success. CASE DESCRIPTION: The One Health Research, Education, and Outreach Centre in Africa (OHRECA), a six-year research-for-development initiative (2020-2025) implemented across multiple African countries, was evaluated. Using a realist-informed mixed-methods evaluation, this study explores how and why OHRECA achieved its outcomes. KEY OUTCOMES: Findings suggest that OHRECA contributed to scientific productivity, workforce development, and more in the target countries. Learning-by-doing and partnerships emerged as key mechanisms while long time-investments and institutional continuity were important contextual conditions supporting these outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: Given the absence of baseline and comparator data for many outcomes, the findings should be interpreted as explanatory case study evidence rather than as a causal effectiveness assessment. Nevertheless, they offer transferable lessons for designing One Health capacity building efforts in African research systems and other low- and middle-income settings.
PUBMED_42780280	PubMed	2026	Slaughtered pigs as reservoirs of One Health-relevant antimicrobial resistance genes in Klebsiella pneumoniae from Brazil. INTRODUCTION: Klebsiella pneumoniae is an important opportunistic pathogen and a recognized reservoir of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) determinants. However, information on AMR profiles and genomic characteristics of Klebsiella circulating in Brazilian swine production remains limited. This study investigated the occurrence, antimicrobial susceptibility, resistance determinants, and genomic characteristics of Klebsiella spp. recovered from pigs at slaughter in southeastern Brazil. METHODS: Rectal swabs were collected from 100 pigs at slaughter, and Klebsiella isolates were identified by culture and PCR. Antimicrobial susceptibility was determined by disk diffusion and broth microdilution for colistin. AMR genes were investigated by PCR, and four representative multidrug-resistant (MDR) K. pneumoniae isolates carrying multiple -lactam, quinolone, and tetracycline resistance genes were further characterized by whole-genome sequencing and comparative genomic analysis. RESULTS: Fifty-three Klebsiella isolates were recovered, including 47 K. pneumoniae, four Klebsiella oxytoca, one Klebsiella quasipneumoniae, and one Klebsiella spp. High frequencies of non-susceptibility were observed for tetracycline (86.8%), ciprofloxacin (77.4%), and amoxicillin-clavulanate (67.9%), while 34 isolates (64.2%) were classified as MDR. Three colistin-resistant isolates carried mcr-1. The most frequently detected AMR genes were bla SHV , bla TEM , tetA, qnrS, and oqxAB. Whole-genome sequencing identified two genomic lineages, ST45 and ST1027, differing in resistance gene content and capsular and O-antigen loci. All sequenced isolates carried the acquired siderophore loci ybt and iuc, indicating the coexistence of acquired virulence-associated loci and multiple AMR genes. DISCUSSION: These findings demonstrate a high occurrence of MDR K. pneumoniae carrying clinically important resistance determinants in pigs at slaughter and reveal the circulation of distinct genomic lineages harboring acquired virulence-associated loci. The results suggest that swine production systems may contribute to the maintenance and potential dissemination of One Health-relevant K. pneumoniae and highlight the importance of integrated genomic surveillance to support antimicrobial stewardship and food safety.
PUBMED_42723374	PubMed	2026	Socio-Ecological Determinants of Zoonotic Waste Management Practices Among Urban Livestock Keepers in Dodoma Region, Tanzania: A Cross-Sectional Study. BACKGROUND: Zoonotic diseases pose an escalating public health threat in rapidly urbanizing regions of low- and middle-income countries like Tanzania, where informal livestock keeping frequently intersects with inadequate municipal sanitation. Understanding livestock keepers' biosecurity practices and their underlying socio-ecological determinants is crucial for preventing cross-species disease transmission within a One Health framework, yet empirical evidence remains limited in expanding administrative capitals such as Dodoma Urban. OBJECTIVE: This study assessed the socio-ecological determinants and biosecurity practices surrounding zoonotic waste management among livestock keepers in Dodoma Urban, Tanzania. METHODS: A community-based, cross-sectional analytical study was conducted among 384 systematically sampled livestock keepers across urban and peri-urban wards. Data were gathered using a pretested, Swahili-translated structured questionnaire. Multivariable logistic regression analysis was performed using IBM SPSS (version 27.0) to identify independent predictors of safe waste management practices, controlling for potential confounders, with p 0.05 and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). RESULTS: A total of 384 livestock keepers participated in the study (mean age: 34.14 7.162 years; 58% male). Overall, only 39.8% (n 153) demonstrated good zoonotic waste management practices, with 60.9% (n 234) relying on open dumping/burning and unmonitored waste accumulation. Multivariable modeling revealed that formal training on zoonotic waste management was significantly associated with good practice (adjusted odds ratio AOR 6.78; 95% CI: 3.10-12.81; p 0.001), followed by college/university education (AOR 5.62; 95% CI: 2.73-10.55; p 0.001) and vocational training (AOR 3.11; 95% CI: 1.19-5.75; p 0.011). Practicing zero-grazing (AOR 5.23; p 0.017), keeping poultry (AOR 3.42; p 0.010), and utilizing disposal methods like incineration (AOR 4.11; p 0.009) or composting pits (AOR 2.89; p 0.021) were also significantly associated with good zoonotic waste management practices. CONCLUSION: Safe zoonotic waste management among urban livestock keepers in Dodoma remains critically low. Compliance is driven by a complex interplay of human capital, economic capacity, structural farming paradigms, and digital network engagement. Addressing these vulnerabilities requires moving beyond generic awareness toward multisectoral One Health strategies that combine targeted vocational training, digital health extension (mHealth), infrastructure incentives for zero-grazing, and local governmental biosecurity governance.
PUBMED_42787101	PubMed	2026	Somalia cannot outbreak-respond its way out of a climate crisis: Building health sovereignty througone health. Somalia faces recurrent climate shocks that intensify food insecurity, displacement, service disruption, and infectious-disease risk. Although outbreak response remains essential, repeated emergency action cannot address the structural conditions that sustain vulnerability. This commentary argues for a shift from reactive outbreak control toward climate-resilient health security grounded in health sovereignty and One Health. We propose integrated climate-One Health early warning, stronger surveillance, resilient WASH and primary healthcare, anticipatory financing, and locally led capacity to prevent climate-sensitive health emergencies before they escalate.
PUBMED_42785551	PubMed	2026	Sources of the utilities used in paediatric cost-utility analyses in children aged under 5 years, and the methods used in their elicitation: a systematic review. OBJECTIVES: Few multi-attribute utility instruments (MAUIs) have been developed and validated for children under five years, limiting the evidence on health-related quality of life used to inform resource allocation decisions. This systematic review aimed to characterize utilities used in cost-utility analyses (CUAs) involving children aged 0-5 years published between 2012 and 2023, their sources, and the methods used to obtain them. METHODS: Studies were identified from the Paediatric Economic Database Evaluation (PEDE) Project. Eligible studies were CUAs reporting quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) with at least one health state for children aged 0-5 years. Descriptive analyses were conducted to summarise study characteristics, sources of utilities, and methods used to obtain utilities. Changes over time were explored by comparing studies published in 2012-2017 with 2018-2023. RESULTS: Of the 1,098 studies screened, 162 met inclusion criteria. Of these, 87 (53.7%) had health states exclusively in the 0-5 years age-group, 16 (9.9%) included states also in the 5-18 years age-group, and 59 (36.4%) included states also in adulthood. Two-thirds of CUAs evaluated were preventative interventions. Seventy percent of studies clearly reported their utility sources. Among studies that obtained utilities from the literature (82.2%), most used MAUIs, with the adult EQ-5D-3L valued using the UK tariff being most common (33%). CONCLUSIONS: CUAs involving children under five years have increased; but the methods for obtaining utilities remain varied and underreported. The frequent reliance on adult MAUIs and utilities underscores the need for validated age-appropriate instruments to improve the validity of QALY estimates in this age group.
PUBMED_42728309	PubMed	2026	Spatial effects of green logistics development on regional sustainable development in Guangdong Province, China. Green logistics has become a crucial driver of low-carbon transformation and sustainable regional growth, yet its spatial effects remain insufficiently understood. This study investigates how the development of green logistics influences regional sustainable development in Guangdong Province, China, with a particular focus on direct impacts and spatial spillover mechanisms. Using panel data from 21 prefecture-level cities for the period 2013-2023, a comprehensive evaluation framework is established to measure both green logistics and sustainable development. The entropy weight method is applied to construct composite indices, while benchmark regression and the Spatial Durbin Model are employed to capture causal relationships and spatial dependence. The empirical results show that green logistics significantly enhances local sustainable development and produces positive spillover effects in neighboring regions, forming a spatial diffusion pattern centered on Guangzhou and Shenzhen. Moreover, heterogeneity tests indicate that Western, Northern, and Eastern Guangdong derive greater marginal benefits than the Pearl River Delta, underscoring the importance of region-specific pathways. These findings underscore the need to strengthen green logistics infrastructure, leverage spatial externalities, and adopt differentiated policies tailored to local contexts. This study contributes to the literature by integrating spatial econometric techniques with environmental and regional development analysis, offering new evidence on how logistics systems support sustainability transitions in rapidly developing economies.
PUBMED_42717797	PubMed	2026	Spatial heterogeneity in exposure to Brucella suis and pathogenic leptospires in feral pigs across New South Wales. Feral pigs (Sus scrofa) are important reservoirs for zoonotic and livestock pathogens in Australia, but robust information on the spatial distribution of pathogens in pig populations remains limited. We analysed serological data from a systematic, state-wide surveillance program to investigate spatial heterogeneity in exposure to Brucella suis and pathogenic leptospires in feral pigs across New South Wales (NSW). Samples were collected from 2548 feral pigs at 81 locations between 2022 and 2026 and tested for antibodies to B. suis, L. interrogans serovars Pomona (hereafter Pomona) and Hardjo, L. borgpetersenii serovar Tarassovi and Coxiella burnetii. Bayesian spatial models were used to predict the probability of B. suis and Pomona seropositivity across the state in relation to feral pig relative abundance, generating spatial risk surfaces directly relevant to animal and human health management. Survey-wide adjusted seroprevalence was 0.16 for B. suis, 0.52 for Pomona, 0.06 for Hardjo and 0.05 for Tarassovi. Brucella suis exposure was concentrated in the north-eastern quadrant of NSW and strongly positively associated with local feral pig density (derived from expert opinion), whereas exposure to Pomona was widespread but locally variable. Seroprevalences of Hardjo and Tarassovi were spatially restricted, and antibodies to C. burnetii were rarely detected. By combining structured state-wide sampling with spatial modelling, this study provides probabilistic inference on pathogen exposure. The results demonstrate how systematic surveillance can provide actionable spatial information for One Health risk management, prioritising risk-based surveillance, assessing confidence in pathogen absence and supporting management responses for endemic, emerging, or exotic animal diseases.
PUBMED_42699664	PubMed	2026	Spatial heterogeneity of Rift Valley fever burden in Kenya: a 10-year One Health zDALY evaluation. BACKGROUND: Rift Valley fever (RVF) is an endemic zoonotic disease in Kenya, with recurring outbreaks that affect both humans and livestock. Despite its impact, the full burden of RVF remains poorly quantified. This study presents the first integrated and spatially disaggregated estimates of RVF burden in Kenya using a One Health approach. METHODS: We quantified the national and subnational burden of RVF in Kenya from 2014 to 2024 using the zoonotic disability-adjusted life years (zDALYs) framework, which combines human health loss (disability-adjusted life years DALYs ) and livestock-related losses (measured as animal loss equivalents ALE ). Estimates were based on reported RVF cases, livestock mortality, abortions, and treatment costs. Monte Carlo simulations were used to generate 95% uncertainty intervals (UIs). RESULTS: The burden of RVF (zDALY per 1000 persons) varied across the counties, with the highest burden observed in northern Kenya. The highest burden was recorded in Marsabit (24.67, 95% UI: 20.22-29.17), Baringo (12.23, 95% UI: 8.05-17.22), Wajir (9.31, 95% UI: 6.08-12.4), Embu (9.07, 95% UI: 6.58-11.63), and Tana River (6.23, 95% UI: 4.23-8.48). The counties with the lowest burden of RVF per 1000 inhabitants were observed in Kiambu (0.02; 95% UI: 0.00-0.07), Kisii (0.01; 95% UI: 0.00-0.07), Meru (0.00; 95% UI: 0.00-0.04), Samburu (0.00; 95% UI: 0.00-0.34), Tharaka Nithi (0.00; 95% UI: 0.00-0.00), and Uasin Gishu counties (0.00; 95% UI: 0.00-0.00). DALY and ALE differed across the counties with Marsabit found to have the highest animal burden (ALE) and Nairobi to have the highest human burden (DALYs). CONCLUSION: This study quantitatively demonstrates the substantial burden of RVF in Kenya across human and livestock populations. The findings can guide targeted risk assessments, preparedness planning, and cost-effective One Health strategies for future RVF outbreaks.
PUBMED_42754328	PubMed	2026	Spatial interactions of urban poverty and livestock environments with dengue incidence: A Bivariate Moran's I Analysis in Denpasar, Bali. INTRODUCTION: Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever (DHF) remains a major public health problem in tropical regions, including Indonesia. Its transmission is influenced by complex interactions between environmental, animal, and human factors. This study applies a One Health approach to examine spatial interactions between livestock environments, urban conditions, and dengue incidence in Denpasar, Bali. METHODS: This study used a cross-sectional spatial design at the subdistrict level, using secondary data from 2025. Dengue cases were analyzed as the dependent variable, while the number of pig farmers and slum areas represented animal and environmental factors, respectively. Spatial analysis was conducted using QGIS and GeoDa, applying Bivariate Moran's I and BiLISA to identify global and local spatial relationships. RESULTS: The analysis showed a significant positive spatial association between the number of pig farmers and dengue incidence (Moran's I 0.127; p 0.041), indicating a clustering pattern. Slum areas were not significantly associated with dengue incidence (p 0.487). Local analysis identified a High-High cluster in Padangsambian Kaja and several Low-High clusters, suggesting potential spatial spillover effects between neighboring areas. DISCUSSION: The findings indicate that livestock-related environments may indirectly influence dengue transmission by creating conditions favorable for mosquito breeding. The presence of spatial clustering and spillover effects highlights the importance of considering interregional connectivity and environmental context in disease control strategies. CONCLUSION: Dengue distribution in Denpasar is shaped by spatial and environmental dynamics, particularly livestock-related factors. Targeted, spatially informed interventions using a One Health approach are essential to improve the effectiveness of dengue prevention and control.
PUBMED_42686722	PubMed	2026	Spatially Decoupling and Kinetically Matching the Oxygen Evolution Reaction via Hydroxyl Spillover at NiO/RuO2 Heterointerfaces. Anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in anion-exchange membrane water electrolysis (AEMWE) relies on sequential hydroxyl capture and intermediate conversion, yet the sluggish kinetics remain a critical challenge. Herein, we report the rational design of NiO/RuO2 heterostructures (NRO) via a template-sacrificial strategy. The integrated heterointerfaces within NRO enable spatial decoupling of OER steps through hydroxyl spillover. Specifically, the NiO domain serves as a hydroxyl reservoir to capture OH-, while the adjacent RuO2 domain facilitates subsequent O-O bond formation. Moreover, spontaneous interfacial electron transfer generates a built-in electric field that drives directional hydroxyl migration across the heterointerface. Enabled by kinetically matched tandem catalysis with continuous hydroxyl supply and rapid intermediate conversion, the optimized NRO catalyst requires overpotentials of only 196 and 251 mV to deliver current densities of 10 and 100 mA cm-2, respectively, and maintains stable operation for over 300 h. The assembled AEMWE achieves 1.0 A cm-2 at a low cell voltage of 1.86 V and operates stably for over 150 h. This interfacial engineering strategy integrates spatial reaction decoupling and electronic modulation, providing a promising approach for developing durable AEMWE anode catalysts.
PUBMED_42757101	PubMed	2026	Spatio-temporal dynamics of Rift Valley fever virus circulation in sentinel livestock herds (2021-2024) before the initial fatal human outbreaks in Senegal. BACKGROUND: Multiple detections of Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) infections in humans, animals and mosquito vectors suggest permanent circulation of RVFV in Senegal. This study investigated the spatial and temporal dynamics of RVFV circulation in central (Sahelian) and southeastern (Sudanian) Senegal from March 2021 to June 2024. METHODS: A total of 976 initially seronegative sheep and goats from sentinel herds in 10 districts and 2 areas were monitored for 40 months. Serum samples were collected quarterly and tested by ELISA, while mosquitoes were collected monthly and screened for RVFV RNA by RT-PCR. RESULTS: Active RVFV circulation was detected in both areas during the four years preceding the 2025 outbreak. Overall, 2989 sera were tested, and 7.2% (95% CI: 5.6-9.0%) of animals seroconverted, while no RVFV RNA was detected from 65,830 mosquitoes. Seroconversion was higher in goats than in sheep (OR 2.6; 95% CI: 1.5-4.6; p 0.001) and during the rainy than the dry season (dry: 9.1% vs rainy: 5.6, p 0.023). CONCLUSION: Enzootic RVFV circulation preceded the 2025 outbreak. Sentinel herd surveillance, integrated with entomological and environmental monitoring, may improve RVFV risk assessment within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42776928	PubMed	2026	Spatiotemporal clustering of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 at the wild waterfowl-poultry interface: Vector-specific spillover risks in the U.S., 2022-2025. The emergence of the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b in North America, beginning in February 2022, has highlighted the dynamic, unpredictable, and regionally variable risk of infections. Studies are needed to assess the spatiotemporal clustering of HPAI H5 at the interface between wild waterfowl and commercial poultry to better understand and mitigate this risk. Publicly available data on HPAI H5 detections in wild birds and commercial poultry from January 2022 to January 2026 were analyzed at the county level. Retrospective space-time permutation models were used to identify and scan for clusters with higher-than-expected detection rates. A total of 17,091 HPAI H5 detections were reported in wild birds across 1,467 county-level locations. Four species, Mallard (Anas platyrhynchos) (2,848 detections, 16.66%), Canada goose (Branta canadensis) (1,496, 8.75%), Green-winged teal (Anas carolinensis) (1,364, 7.98%), and Snow goose (Anser caerulescens) (1,084, 6.34%), accounted for 39.73% of detections. In commercial poultry, 532 outbreaks in turkey operations, 148 outbreaks in table-egg layer operations, 99 outbreaks in broiler chicken operations, and 89 outbreaks in commercial duck operations were reported, respectively. Several spillover events followed an east-to-west expansion. In early 2022, mallard detections preceded outbreaks in Northeast egg-layer and duck farms, while snow goose detections in the Upper Midwest coincided with turkey farm outbreaks. In the Pacific and Mountain West during summer 2022, detections in Canada geese overlapped with turkey farm outbreaks. A resurgence occurred in the Midwest (2025), with snow and Canada goose detections overlapping severe outbreaks in turkey and layer flocks. Additionally, in the Upper Midwest, Canada goose and mallard detections overlapped with outbreaks in commercial duck farms during fall-winter 2025. The study findings demonstrate distinct vector-based transmission dynamics of HPAI H5 at the wild waterfowl-poultry interface. Farm biosecurity strategies must adapt to these recurrent, vector-specific risks.
PUBMED_42780240	PubMed	2026	Spatiotemporal patterns and spatial spillover effects of public service supply for national fitness in China. Public service for nationwide fitness serves as a key pillar for advancing the Healthy China initiative and reducing health inequities. However, regional development disparities and supply-demand mismatches remain prominent, and empirical research from a public health perspective on the long-term spatiotemporal evolution and spatial spillover effects of such services is still lacking. Using panel data from 30 Chinese provinces from 2013 to 2022, this study measures the supply level of public services for nationwide fitness using the CRITIC-entropy weight method, and employs spatial trend surface analysis, spatial autocorrelation, and a spatial lag model (SAR) to investigate its spatiotemporal patterns and spatial spillover effects. The results show that the supply level of China's nationwide fitness public services exhibits a three-stage upward trend, with an average annual growth rate of 7.18%, and an overall spatial pattern characterized by higher levels in the east than in the west, and higher in the south than in the north. The disparity between the eastern and western regions has narrowed, whereas the north-south gap has continued to widen. Economic development level and urbanization level demonstrate bidirectional positive spatial spillover effects; population density, government support, and educational structure only affect local supply levels; transportation accessibility shows no significant effect. Therefore, differentiated regional policies and strengthened interprovincial cooperation are needed to optimize resource allocation with a focus on health equity. These findings provide a reference for formulating public health strategies, alleviating health inequities, and improving the overall health status of residents.
PUBMED_42676235	PubMed	2026	Specific light-harvesting complexes mediate grana stacking and prevent energy spillover between photosystems in plant chloroplasts. Land plant chloroplasts are characterized by a prominent morphological feature: the stacking of thylakoid membranes into grana, ie defining a continuous membranous structure surrounded by the stroma and folded into appressed grana and non-appressed domains, enclosing the thylakoid lumen. Photosystem II and its antenna system are concentrated, whereas Photosystem I and ATPase are located in the grana end membranes and, in the stroma, membranes connecting grana. Thylakoid stacking promotes the physical separation of Photosystems I and II, thereby ensuring a balanced flow of excitation energy between them. Through a genetic dissection of the light-harvesting complex subfamily Lhcb, we showed that removal of the antenna system serving Photosystem II completely abolished grana formation, whereas deletion of specific Lhcb subgroups reduced stacking by up to 40%. Lhcb5 alone was sufficient to partially restore stacking, whereas exclusive expression of Lhcb2 resulted in grana with an unusually large size, which disassembled upon illumination. Time-resolved fluorescence measurements revealed that the extent of excitation energy spillover from PSII to Photosystem I correlated with the level of Lhcb depletion, rather than with granal architecture. These findings provide genetic evidence for a functional link between Photosystem II antenna composition, lateral heterogeneity, and excitation energy partition between photosystems.
PUBMED_42743976	PubMed	2026	Spillover Effects of Medicaid Expansion on Insurance Coverage, Diagnosis, and Survival Among Low-Income Older Patients With Cancer. BACKGROUND: Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act primarily benefits adults aged 65 years but may also indirectly benefit individuals aged 65 years. This study examines the associations of Medicaid expansion with insurance coverage and cancer outcomes among older patients residing in low-income areas. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Using the National Cancer Database, we identified patients aged 65 years, newly diagnosed with cancer 2010-2021, and residing in areas with median household income 200% of the federal poverty level. Using the quasi-experimental difference-in-differences design, multivariable models compared dual Medicare-Medicaid enrollment or Medicaid-only coverage, stage at diagnosis, treatment initiation, and 2-year overall survival before and after Medicaid expansion in expansion versus non-expansion states. RESULTS: Our sample included 1,461,540 patients. Dual Medicare-Medicaid or Medicaid-only coverage increased in Medicaid expansion states (10.3%-11.3%) and decreased in Medicaid non-expansion states (9.4%-8.1%), resulting in a net increase of 1.25 percentage points (ppt; 95% CI, 1.02-1.48). Early-stage cancer diagnoses decreased overall, driven by prostate cancer, but declined less in expansion states than in non-expansion states, with a net adjusted relative increase of 1.00 ppt (95% CI, 0.59-1.41). Such protective effects were stronger for lung/bronchus and head and neck cancers. Treatment initiation within 30 days also decreased less in expansion states than non-expansion states, with a net adjusted increase of 0.74 ppt (95% CI, 0.34-1.14). Two-year overall survival increased more in expansion states (58.8%-62.4%) than non-expansion states (59.2%-62.5%), leading to a net increase of 0.70 ppt (95% CI, 0.35-1.04). Such increase was most notable for stage IV, lung/bronchus, kidney, and bladder cancers. CONCLUSIONS: Medicaid expansion was associated with increased Medicaid coverage, attenuated declines in early-stage diagnosis and timely treatment initiation, and improved survival among low-income older patients with cancer, highlighting important spillover benefits beyond the target population.
PUBMED_42775180	PubMed	2026	State-level nutritional disparities and policy priorities in India. BACKGROUND: Nutritional inequality persists in India despite sustained economic growth, expanding healthcare infrastructure, and large-scale social welfare programs. National averages mask substantial subnational disparities, concealing deep inequalities that continue to shape nutritional outcomes across States and Union Territories. This study quantifies nutritional inequality across Indian States and Union Territories using the latest NFHS-6 factsheet (2023-24) data, integrating multidimensional and spatial methods to provide a comprehensive evidence base for geographically targeted nutrition policy. METHODS: Data from 36 States/UTs (excluding Manipur) were analyzed using an ecological, cross-sectional, and comparative research design. Outcome indicators included child stunting, wasting, and underweight prevalence, which were standardized and aggregated into a Child Undernutrition Burden Index (CUBI). A Dietary Vulnerability Index (DVI) was also constructed using standardized indicators of dietary diversity, nutrient-rich food consumption, and household food insecurity. Inequality was assessed via coefficient of variation, Theil decomposition, and Moran's I spatial autocorrelation. Advanced methods included quantile regression to examine heterogeneous associations across burden percentiles and spatial Durbin models to assess direct, indirect, and total spillover effects across neighboring states. RESULTS: National prevalence was 29.3% for stunting, 19.0% for wasting, and 31.8% for underweight. Jharkhand (CUBI 1.35), Gujarat (0.94), and Bihar (0.81) had the highest burden, while Goa (-1.45), Kerala (-1.32), and Tamil Nadu (-1.21) had the lowest. Significant spatial autocorrelation (Moran's I 0.47, p 0.01) indicated clustering in eastern and central India. Female education showed stronger protective associations in high-burden states ( -0.487) than in low-burden states ( -0.346). The spatial Durbin model identified significant spillovers ( 0.413, p 0.01), including direct ( -0.362) and indirect ( -0.184) effects of female education. Within-region inequality accounted for 61.4% of total inequality. Female education, sanitation, and women's empowerment showed the strongest protective associations, explaining 64% of state-level CUBI variation. DVI was strongly associated with CUBI ( 0.842, p 0.001). All findings represent ecological associations and should not be interpreted as individual-level causal effects. CONCLUSION: India's nutritional transition remains characterized by persistent spatial clustering and substantial within-region inequality. State-level priorities should focus on female education, sanitation, dietary diversity, and women's empowerment, while CUBI, quantile regression, and spatial spillover evidence can guide targeted interventions and coordinated regional nutrition policies.
PUBMED_42787989	PubMed	2026	Strategic surveillance plan for zoonotic leishmaniosis in Portugal. BACKGROUND: Leishmania infantum is a vector-borne zoonotic parasite causing zoonotic leishmaniosis across Southern European countries, with poor prognosis for immunocompromised humans or animals. Improved monitoring and control of zoonotic leishmaniosis at the level of animal reservoir is critical to support One Health coordinated responses aligned with the objectives set out in the WHO roadmap for Neglected Tropical Diseases. METHODS: We evaluate the suitability of a leishmaniosis surveillance system grounded on the network of public municipal animal shelters in Portugal (CROA), using dogs and cats as sentinels for sandfly exposure and L. infantum infection. Unowned dogs (n 1194) and cats (n 478) admitted at 34 CROA and four private shelters between 2021 and 2024, representing 90 municipalities distributed over six geographical regions of mainland Portugal, were clinically evaluated and serologically tested for antibodies to Leishmania parasites and Phlebotomus perniciosus salivary proteins by means of a multi-antigen enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). RESULTS: Canine (CanL) and feline (FeL) leishmaniosis seroprevalences were estimated at 11.8% and 5.0%, respectively. Serological evidence of exposure to P. perniciosus was found in 18.2% and 6.3% for dogs and cats, respectively. Significant regional differences in CanL and FeL seroprevalences were observed across the country, reflecting areas of differential endemicity. The study concluded that CROA network can substantially strengthen zoonotic leishmaniosis surveillance in Portugal, by enabling a geographically distributed sampling of animal reservoirs across multiple regions of mainland Portugal. When analysed using the proposed multi-antigen ELISA, these samples provide easily accessible, potentially useful and cost-effective epidemiological information.
PUBMED_42772696	PubMed	2026	Strengthening Environmental Control of Antimicrobial Resistance in Brazil: A Call to Integrate Hospital Wastewater Surveillance and Treatment into National Policy. The environmental spread of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) through hospital wastewater (HWW) remains insufficiently addressed in Brazil's national AMR control strategies. This commentary synthesizes recommendations from a multi-institutional technical workshop held in Brazil in June 2025 to support the integration of hospital wastewater surveillance and treatment (HWWST) into the renewed Brazilian National Action Plan on AMR (PAN-BR). Representatives from government, international organizations, and academia identified the absence of a standardized national HWW surveillance framework, limited treatment requirements, fragmented governance, and insufficient mechanisms to translate innovation into implementation. Immediate priorities include developing and piloting a tiered surveillance protocol, selecting representative public and private hospitals for treatment pilots, establishing formal multisectoral coordination, engaging industry and sanitation stakeholders, and defining financing, innovation, and intellectual property pathways for scale-up. Integrating HWWST into the renewed PAN-BR would strengthen Brazil's One Health response and support its G20 and United Nations commitments.
PUBMED_42698703	PubMed	2026	Strengthening Libya's pandemic preparedness using the National Bridging Workshop One Health Roadmap. BACKGROUND: Libya faces recurrent and emerging health threats at the human, animal, and environment interface, compounded by prolonged instability and fragmented health systems. The National Bridging Workshop (NBW) is a structured approach to identify multisectoral collaboration gaps and develop a joint One Health Roadmap aligned with international health security frameworks. This study aimed to describe Libya's first NBW and evaluate its effect on increasing participants' One Healthknowledge. METHODS: We conducted a quasi-experimental study using a single-group longitudinal design with pre-intervention, immediate post-intervention, and three-month follow-up assessments of One Health knowledge. The intervention was to deliver the NBW in Tripoli from 23 to 25 February 2025. Over three days, multisectoral stakeholders assessed collaboration across 16 technical areas using four locally adapted hazard scenarios (rabies, leishmaniasis, salmonellosis, and antimicrobial resistance AMR ), mapped priority gaps to relevant International Health Regulations and Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) indicators and co-developed a One Health Roadmap. RESULTS: Seventy participants from human health, animal health, environmental health, food and drug control, and academia attended. Collaboration gaps were most consistently observed in technical-level coordination, sustainable financing, laboratory systems, education and training, and emergency funding across scenarios. Participants developed a joint roadmap comprising 11 objectives and 26 activities, with sustainable financing and the integration of One Health into legislation identified as the key priorities. Knowledge scores differed significantly across the three assessments time points (Friedman test, p 0.001; Kendall's W 0.44), indicating a moderate overall effect. Pairwise comparisons showed significantly higher scores immediately after the workshop than at baseline (median, 19 (18-20) vs. 16; p 0.001; rank-biserial correlation, r 0.64) and at three months than at baseline (median, 18.5 (15-20) vs. 16 (13-18); p 0.015; r 0.40). CONCLUSIONS: The NBW was successfully implemented in a fragile setting and generated a prioritized One Health Roadmap. Knowledge gains that persisted at three months suggest that NBW may contribute to capacity building beyond planning outputs, supporting the longer-term operationalization of One Health and strengthening preparedness and response.
PUBMED_42770068	PubMed	2026	Strengthening One Health AMR Surveillance in Africa: From Cross-Sectoral Data to Policy Action. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) has emerged as one of the greatest threats to global health, with Africa bearing a disproportionate burden: an estimated 1.05 million deaths were associated with bacterial AMR and approximately 250,000 deaths were directly attributable to AMR in the WHO African Region in 2019 alone. This burden reflects high infectious disease prevalence, limited diagnostic capacity, weak antimicrobial stewardship, and fragmented surveillance systems. Given that resistant pathogens and resistance genes circulate across humans, animals, and the environment, effective surveillance requires a coordinated One Health approach. This narrative review synthesizes published literature (2015-2026) identified through PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and Google Scholar to assess the status of One Health AMR surveillance in Africa, examine progress across the human, animal, and environmental sectors, identify major implementation barriers, and propose strategic priorities for strengthening integrated surveillance systems. The evidence reviewed shows that participation in surveillance initiatives such as GLASS has expanded and laboratory capacity has improved in several countries; however, substantial gaps remain in veterinary and environmental surveillance, laboratory infrastructure, data interoperability, governance, workforce capacity, and sustainable financing. Fragmented information systems and limited cross-sectoral collaboration continue to impede timely detection of emerging resistance and evidence-informed policy action. Based on these findings, we recommend prioritizing integrated governance structures, strengthened laboratory networks, interoperable digital surveillance platforms, and sustainable domestic financing as foundational steps, with genomic technologies, wastewater surveillance, and regional collaboration serving as complementary priorities as feasibility and resources allow. Strengthening One Health surveillance will be critical for improving early detection of resistant pathogens, informing antimicrobial stewardship, supporting outbreak preparedness, and reducing the growing health and economic burden of AMR across Africa.
PUBMED_42725038	PubMed	2026	Strengthening One Health Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance in Bangladesh: Insights from the Fleming fund country grant. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is an escalating global public health concern, with particularly severe implications for low and middle-income countries such as Bangladesh. In Bangladesh context, fragmented surveillance systems and the extensive use of antimicrobials across human, animal, and aquaculture sectors contribute to the rapid emergence and spread of resistance. Strengthening integrated surveillance through a One Health approach is therefore crucial to support effective policy development and response strategies. This review outlines the policy, implementation, and key outcomes of the Fleming Fund Country Grant in Bangladesh between 2020 and 2025. It draws upon multiple data sources, including programme reports, routine AMR surveillance data, laboratory capacity-building initiatives, and stakeholder engagement activities across human, animal, aquaculture, and environmental sectors. Through this initiative, a coordinated national AMR surveillance network was established, comprising 20 laboratories across multiple sectors, including three designated national reference laboratories. The initiative strengthened surveillance through the introduction of standardized protocols and SOPs, improved diagnostic capacity, skilled workforce, and implementation of laboratory quality assurance systems, including EQA and NEQA. These measures enhanced the accuracy, consistency, and reliability of AMR surveillance data. In addition, the establishment of a national AMR data integration platform facilitated real time data sharing and evidence-based decision-making. A total of 208,346 bacterial isolates were analyzed, with AST results reported to the AMR dashboard across the human, and animal, health sectors. Overall, the Fleming Fund programme has made a substantial contribution to strengthening integrated AMR surveillance in Bangladesh by operationalizing a One Health framework. Continued political commitment, increased domestic investment, and the institutionalization of surveillance systems will be essential to sustain these gains and ensure long-term resilience against AMR.
PUBMED_42705418	PubMed	2026	Streptococcus suis meningitis in a middle aged woman - a rare zoonotic pathogen - a case report. Streptococcus suis is a zoonotic pathogen frequently reported in China and Vietnam, and is frequently under recognized in India. A 52 year old woman presented with fever, headache, vomiting and altered sensorium. CSF analysis was suggestive of acute bacterial meningitis. Blood cultures grew Streptococcus suis which was detected by MALDI-TOF. Effective management depends on timely detection of pathogen.
PUBMED_42686580	PubMed	2026	Study of weight loss intervention to find an effective strategy for obesity management and the TARGET of weight loss amount for reducing health disorders (SLIM-TARGET): a randomized controlled trial. This randomized controlled study aimed to clarify weight loss targets for improving obesity-related disorders in individuals with overweight or obesity. A total of 294 participants with six obesity-related conditions were assigned to either a standard or intensive treatment group, with 12-month weight loss targets of 3% and 7%, respectively. The standard group followed the Japanese Guidelines for the Management of Obesity Disease 2016. The intensive group received frequent nutritional guidance, enhanced diet and exercise therapy, and additional pharmacotherapy. The primary outcome was weight loss and improvement in at least two obesity-related disorders at 12 months. Secondary outcomes included remission of health disorders, improvement in at least one health disorder, and visceral fat reduction. At 12 months, the weight loss was -2.5% in the intensive group and -1.7% in the standard group, with no significant difference in the primary outcome. However, remission of health disorders was achieved in 16.9% of the intensive group compared with 6.2% of the standard group (adjusted odds ratio 3.079; 95% CI 1.075-8.823; p 0.036). Visceral fat reduction was greater in the intensive group (-20.46 cm2 vs. -8.9 cm2; p 0.039). Intensive treatment significantly improved blood pressure early and increased treatment motivation scores by 10.9% (95% CI: 1.2-20.6) at 24 months (p 0.004). In both groups, 60% of the participants showed improvement in at least one disorder. Despite not achieving the target weight loss, resulting in no significant difference in the primary outcome, the intensive treatment increased remission percentages, improved early blood pressure control, and enhanced long-term treatment motivation. The study was registered at UMIN Clinical Trials Registry (UMIN ID: UMIN000031862).
PUBMED_42686664	PubMed	2026	Sub-2 nm Pt Clusters Boost Lattice Oxygen Activation in Ultrathin In2O3 Nanosheets for Ultrafast and Wide-Range Hydrogen Sensing. The safe deployment of hydrogen (H2) as a clean fuel requires portable sensors capable of rapid, sensitive, and reliable H2 detection over a wide concentration range. Loading noble metals on metal oxide semiconductors (MOS) is a promising route for enhance H2 sensing; however, achieving high atomic utilization at low noble metal loading while simultaneously improving sensitivity remains challenging. Herein, sub-2 nm Pt clusters ( 2 nm) loading on ultrathin In2O3 nanosheet-aggregated hierarchical structures (Ptsub-In2O3) are successfully prepared. The Ptsub-In2O3-based sensor demonstrates an ultrafast response time of 1 s and a recovery time of 4 s, along with an exceptionally wide detection range spanning six orders of magnitude (0.2 ppm to 2% H2), excellent selectivity, and outstanding long-term stability. Mechanistic investigations using H2-TPR, X-ray absorption spectroscopy, and density functional theory calculations reveal that the sub-nanometer Pt clusters not only facilitate hydrogen spillover but also effectively activate the surface lattice oxygen of In2O3, which collectively account for the drastically enhanced sensing performance. This work demonstrates that atomic-scale engineering of noble metal clusters offers a viable pathway toward high-performance, practical gas sensors.
PUBMED_42773725	PubMed	2026	Substance use and related problems in Nigeria: Research and policy perspectives. AIM: To provide an overview and critical analysis of substance use and related problems in Nigeria within an evolving sub-regional and regional markets and policy landscapes. The analysis covers epidemiology, prevention, treatment and harm reduction as well as policy and research. METHODS: The analysis is based on narrative synthesis of available academic and grey literature, policy documents and relevant reports produced by government and non-governmental organizations. This synthesis captures trends in substance use, describes prevention and treatment programmes, analyses trends in policy and comments on the state of addiction science in Nigeria. RESULTS: There is a long history of consumption of psychoactive substances in Nigeria. Alcohol, tobacco and cannabis use were seen as problems to be addressed before independence in 1960. Cocaine and heroin joined the list as a spillover effect of their trafficking through West African countries to western markets beginning in the 1980s. A recent trend is the rise in the use of synthetic substances (opioids, stimulants and depressants) across West Africa. The rising problem of substance use has evoked a response from government and civil society in the form of substance use prevention, treatment services for substance use disorders and essential harm reduction services for people who inject substances or consume opioids. Yet, these services are insufficient and people who use substances face barriers to accessing treatment and harm reduction. Despite some reforms, especially implementation of essential harm reduction services, enforcement-based approaches remain dominant in Nigeria's policy as in most African countries. Commendably, mechanisms have been established to collate data on substance use and related harms at regional and sub-regional levels, which has helped to shape public health responses to substance use at country level. Nigeria has also conducted national surveys of substance use, with support from international partners. Nevertheless, data collection remains irregular and more qualitative studies are needed to provide insights into contextual factors shaping substance use. CONCLUSION: The rising level of substance use in Nigeria highlights the importance of a balanced and comprehensive policy that prioritizes demand and harm reduction measures. This requires funding for research to generate evidence to inform and shape interventions.
PUBMED_42679051	PubMed	2026	Supporting the research capability and capacity of the pharmacy workforce in Wales: a rapid review of the literature and stakeholder engagement. OBJECTIVES: To identify the key components of interventions to build research capability and capacity of the pharmacy workforce in Wales using a behavioural-science approach. Local workforce barriers and enablers, global literature, and stakeholder views were explored to inform strategies for supporting pharmacy research engagement. METHODS: Phase 1 stakeholder engagement established barriers and enablers using the Capability, Opportunity, Motivation-Behaviour (COM-B) model. Findings from a rapid literature review identified core elements to support research. Phase 2 stakeholder engagement gathered feedback on findings from Phase 1 from pharmacy research leaders and staff in one Health Board. KEY FINDINGS: Seven papers reporting positive research activity outcomes were identified, from which nine core elements for strengthening research capability and capacity were derived: Strategy, Funding, Partnerships with Higher Education Institutions (HEIs), Physical resources, Networking, Mentorship/support/supervision, Training, Identity, and Protected time. Stakeholders prioritized Strategy, Partnerships, and Identity. Mapping of pharmacy staff barriers and enablers to the COM-B model and nine elements demonstrated how capability (skills, knowledge), opportunity (time, resources, networks), and motivation (professional recognition, culture) can be addressed. Findings emphasize these elements should be implemented together, embedded in organisational culture, and supported through strategic planning and sustained investment. CONCLUSIONS: Interventions to support pharmacy professionals' research engagement should include all nine core elements, combined appropriately and underpinned by the COM-B model of behaviour, tailoring the operationalisation of these elements to local need. Combining these elements within organisational culture, education, and planning can embed research as a core professional role, ensuring sustained capability, opportunity, and motivation to engage with research across the pharmacy profession.
PUBMED_42787270	PubMed	2026	Surveillance of zoonotic respiratory viral infections in animal farms: a model project with a focus on One Health approach-A study protocol. BACKGROUND: The One Health approach recognizes the interconnectedness of human, animal, and environmental health in addressing the growing threat of zoonotic diseases. This study aims to establish an integrated One Health surveillance system for the early detection and monitoring of zoonotic respiratory viral infections at the human-animal-environment interface in Tiruvallur District, Tamil Nadu, India. OBJECTIVES: The study aims to establish a longitudinal surveillance system for the early detection of emerging and re-emerging zoonotic respiratory viral infections across livestock animals, animal handlers, and the farm environment interface; and ii) determine the occurrence and distribution of selected zoonotic respiratory viruses, and assess the influence of seasonal and climatic factors on their occurrence and transmission. METHODS: Following sensitization of farm owners and animal handlers through the Animal Husbandry Department, 40 livestock farms from four selected blocks of Tiruvallur District, rearing cattle, buffalo, goats, sheep, swine, and poultry, will be enrolled in each surveillance round. Animal nasal swabs, respiratory samples from animal handlers, and environmental samples (air and wastewater) will be collected. Field surveillance will be carried out by a study team comprising a veterinarian and field investigators. Sixteen surveillance rounds (eight rounds annually) will be conducted over 2 years, covering two complete climatic cycles. Approximately 7,360 animal swab samples, 960 samples from animal handlers, and 960 environmental samples will be collected in each study phase. Animal samples will be screened using a pooled testing strategy followed by real-time RT-PCR for the detection of selected zoonotic respiratory viruses, while human samples will be tested individually. EXPECTED OUTCOMES: The study is expected to establish a robust One Health surveillance framework and generate baseline epidemiological data on zoonotic respiratory viruses circulating among livestock, animal handlers, and the farm environment in Tamil Nadu. The findings will strengthen integrated surveillance, support early warning systems, facilitate timely veterinary and public health responses, and provide evidence to inform future One Health policies and preparedness strategies for emerging zoonotic respiratory viral infections.
PUBMED_42718589	PubMed	2026	Surveillance without silos: a One Health data imperative for avian influenza in West Africa. Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) has circulated in West Africa since Nigeria's first human case in 2006, making the region a key entry point and dispersal hub for multiple virus lineages in sub-Saharan Africa. The 2.3.4.4b virus clade driving the global spread of avian influenza is now infecting mammals more often, a troubling sign that raises the risk of a future pandemic. At the same time, West Africa's ability to control HPAI is held back by fragmented surveillance systems. Animal, human and environmental health services operate in isolation, rely on incompatible data formats and are managed by separate institutions, which undermines early detection and rapid response. This paper describes the existing surveillance silos in West Africa and outlines the consequences of failing to integrate them, including delayed detection of future human or animal health threats. It highlights emerging examples of One Health surveillance efforts in Nigeria, Senegal, Guinea, Benin and Ghana. From an operational standpoint, five conditions are essential for early warning and timely response: interoperable health information systems; shared governance across sectors; sustainable financing; strong communication with poultry-keeping communities; and effective cross-border collaboration. Establishing fully integrated, system-wide national surveillance platforms is indispensable for effective preparedness. Without such integration, West African countries will continue to detect and respond to emerging health threats too late. Given the region's recurrent zoonotic spillover and expanding ecological vulnerabilities, embedding data integration at the core of preparedness strategies is essential for mitigating the risk of future pandemics.
PUBMED_42744055	PubMed	2026	Sustaining Kerala's Progress against the Nipah virus: Operational strategies for long-term preparedness face to a recurrent zoonotic threat. BACKGROUND: Nipah virus (NiV), a highly pathogenic zoonotic henipavirus with case fatality rates ranging from 40 to 75%, remains a recurrent public health threat in Kerala, India. Despite rapid containment of previous outbreaks, repeated spillover events underscore persistent ecological and systemic vulnerabilities. METHODS: We conducted a narrative policy and systems analysis integrating outbreak investigations, national laboratory guidelines, ecological evidence, and recent global research priorities (2020-2026)n the objectives being to identify structural preparedness gaps and to propose operationally feasible enhancements. RESULTS: Five strategic domains were identified: (1) optimization of diagnostic systems through a tiered hybrid laboratory model; (2) expansion of integrated One Health surveillance beyond bat reservoirs to livestock and ecological interfaces; (3) uniform health system preparedness across all tiers of care; (4) targeted digital outbreak intelligence systems adapted to localized transmission dynamics; and (5) spillover prevention strategies addressing human-animal interfaces. For each axis, resource implications, feasibility constraints, and implementation barriers are discussed. CONCLUSION: Sustainable NiV preparedness in Kerala requires calibrated investment in diagnostic decentralization, cross-sectoral surveillance integration, workforce strengthening, and targeted digital augmentation. System-level interventions may serve as a template for other NiV-endemic regions facing recurrent zoonotic spillover.
PUBMED_42687317	PubMed	2026	Switching N2O Adsorption Geometry from the O-End to the N-End on Au Nanoparticle-Decorated ZnO Enables Enhanced Sensing Performance. Nitrous oxide (N2O) is a potent greenhouse gas, but its chemical inertness hinders sensitive chemiresistive sensing. We demonstrate here that Au-decorated ZnO (Au-ZnO) dramatically enhances N2O detection. At an operating temperature of 260 C, the Au-ZnO sensor responds to 25 ppm N2O with a value of 7.6, which is a 3.8-fold enhancement over the ZnO sensor. It also exhibits high selectivity against common greenhouse gases, a lower theoretical limit of detection (0.24 ppm), a fast response time (10 s), and reliable stability. The previously elusive mechanism has been uncovered by integrating experimental characterizations and density functional theory calculations. A strong metal-support interaction, abundant oxygen vacancies at the Au-ZnO interface, and an electron-rich surface collectively switch N2O adsorption geometry from the O-end (physisorption on ZnO) to the N-end (weak chemisorption on Au-ZnO). This switch induces significant intramolecular charge rearrangement of N2O, which is crucial for enhancing the selective N2O sensing reaction. The abundance of reactive sites, the spillover effect, and the catalytic action of Au nanoparticles, as well as the narrowed band gap, promote N2O adsorption, surface reactions, and rapid charge transfer collectively. This work goes beyond the traditional oxygen-ionosorption model by showing that switching adsorption geometry and intramolecular polarization are crucial for activating inert molecules. This provides a detailed explanation of how to create high-performance N2O sensors.
PUBMED_42677955	PubMed	2026	Synergistic Catalysis of Single-Atom Alloys and Ordered Indium Clusters in Aluminum Sheet for Enhanced Hydrogen Production. The hydrolysis of aluminum (Al) in pure water is regarded as a greatly promising strategy for on-demand hydrogen supply due to the high energy density of Al and the operational simplicity of the process. However, its precise reaction mechanism remains poorly understood. Here, we report an efficient smelting method to fabricate AlGaIn alloy sheet and elucidate the atomic-scale reaction pathways of the hydrolysis process. Spherical aberration correction electron microscopy, X-ray absorption fine structure, and in situ scanning electron microscopy reveal that AlGaIn alloy sheet shows a typical layered structure with rich grain boundaries and is composed of a uniform reactive surface AlGa film, AlGa1 single-atom alloys, and highly ordered In atom clusters. An optimized AlGaIn alloy sheet demonstrates excellent hydrolysis performance at room temperature when directly immersed in pure water without prior pulverization. Ambient-pressure x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and density functional theory (DFT) calculations confirm that the hydrolysis reaction is initiated at the active sites on the reactive AlGa film and is further accelerated by a cooperative catalytic effect of AlGa1 single-atom alloys and highly ordered In atom clusters. In particular, In clusters mainly facilitate water dissociation, while AlGa1 single-atom alloys are responsible for enhancing H combination and Al spillover.
PUBMED_42741807	PubMed	2026	Synergy of Palladium Nanoparticles and Single Atoms Promoted Tandem Reactions to Produce Hydroxyl Radical for Efficient Photoelectrochemical Water Purification. Enhancing the highly selective photocatalytic generation of hydroxyl radical for water purification is extremely desirable but remains challenging since it normally requires a series of reactions associated with different catalysts. Here we report a synergistic catalyst (PdSAs+NPs/Vvac-BiVO4) with dual-functional active sites of palladium nanoparticles and single-atoms that are coordinatively responsible for the synthesis and decomposition of H2O2 in an optimized tandem reaction pathway. The application of this catalyst in the photoelectrochemical system can significantly enhance the production of H2O2 and OH, with yields that are 531 and 3.5 times higher than its counterparts, respectively. Importantly, this catalyst can be applied for efficient water purification with superior performances including high catalytic activity and stability, wide applicability for different refractory pollutants, excellent performance in real-water systems, and good detoxification property. Physical, theoretical and in situ spectroscopy investigations show the crucial role of PdSAs+NPs/Vvac-BiVO4 catalyst, where the Pd nanoparticles promote the generation of H2O2 via O2 activation and further its desorption and migration to the nearby Pd single-atom sites via spillover, while the Pd single-atoms boost the catalytic decomposition of H2O2 to OH. This study provides new insights into OH production via the design of synergistic catalyst with dual-functional active sites for enhanced water purification.
PUBMED_42715748	PubMed	2027	Synergy of local tip electric field mediated interfacial water activation and hydrogen spillover for alkaline seawater hydrogen evolution. Efficient interfacial water activation and favorable hydrogen spillover (HSo) are two indispensable prerequisites for high-performance alkaline seawater hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), as both jointly govern the sluggish reaction kinetics that severely restrict seawater electrolysis toward green hydrogen production. Developing robust HER electrocatalysts capable of simultaneously optimizing these two processes therefore stands as a core demand for viable alkaline seawater hydrogen generation. In this work, we construct PtRu bimetal-decorated CoP nanorods with a hierarchical high-curvature structure that generates distinctive localized tip electric fields for enhanced alkaline seawater HER. Mechanistic investigations reveal that the tip-induced local electric field activates interfacial water and lowers the water dissociation energy barrier, while the interfacial electron density gradient drives efficient HSo. The synergy of these two effects simultaneously upgrades the HER performance in pure alkaline electrolyte and alkaline seawater. Electrochemical tests demonstrate that the catalyst requires only an overpotential of 25 mV to reach a current density of 10 mA cm-2 in 1 M KOH, with a Tafel slope of 52.8 mV dec-1, and can operate stably for 135 h. In the 1 M KOH + 0.5 M NaCl simulated seawater system, the performance is comparable to that in the pure alkaline electrolyte, while in the natural seawater alkaline electrolyte, it still delivers a HER activity of 68 mV 10 mA cm-2 and operational stability over 100 h. This work elucidates the multilevel synergistic mechanism among the localized electric field, interfacial water activation and HSo, providing new insights and an experimental basis for the rational design of high-performance alkaline seawater HER catalysts.
PUBMED_42715281	PubMed	2026	Temporal, seasonal, and spatial patterns of Mpox in the DRC, 2002-2022: longitudinal surveillance study. INTRODUCTION: Mpox has shown increasing incidence and geographic spread since its first identification in the Democratic Republic of the 001 Congo (DRC) in 1970. METHODOLOGY: We analyzed weekly mpox surveillance data reported from 2002-2022 in the DRC. Temporal trends were assessed using time-series decomposition to separate secular trends, seasonal patterns, and residual variation. Change-point analysis identified distinct transmission phases. Spatial trends were analyzed through thematic mapping of incidence rates across Health Zones. 001 RESULTS: Between 2002 and 2022, a total of 55,072 suspected mpox cases and 1,297 deaths were reported, corresponding to an overall case fatality rate (CFR) of 2.4% and a mean CFR of 2.15% (95% CI: 1.8-2.5). Incidence increased progressively, with marked rises after 2010 and further intensification after 2015. Recurrent seasonal peaks were observed at the beginning of the year (February) and during mid-year (May-July). Change-point analysis identified four distinct transmission phases, during which annualized incidence increased from 0.78 to 2.67 cases per 100,000 population, alongside a steady geographic expansion from 56 to 159 health zones. By the most recent phase (2018-2022), approximately 30% of health zones nationwide had reported mpox cases. While CFRs declined during the intermediate phases, they increased again in recent years, reaching 2.63% in Phase IV. CONCLUSIONS: Mpox remains persistently endemic in the DRC, with progressive geographic expansion. These findings underscore the need for sustained surveillance, strengthened community engagement, and targeted prevention strategies embedded within a broader One Health framework to address zoonotic and ecological drivers of transmission.
PUBMED_42694085	PubMed	2026	Territorial expansion and parasitic zoonoses: the pampas gray fox in Argentina as a case study and its educational potential for prevention.
PUBMED_42766132	PubMed	2026	The 35th Annual Meeting of the Society of Virology (GfV) in Heidelberg: uniting virology research across German-speaking countries. The Society of Virology (GfV) is a non-profit association and academic society dedicated to promoting virology across all disciplines in the German-speaking countries of Austria, Germany, and Switzerland. This mission is pursued through a variety of activities, most notably its annual meeting, which provides a stimulating environment-particularly for young scientists and students-to exchange ideas, establish new collaborations, and learn from leading virologists in an informal setting. This year, the GfV held its annual meeting in the picturesque city of Heidelberg, bringing together more than 1,000 participants. The program featured five plenary sessions with distinguished speakers presenting their latest research findings. Topics included virus evolution, the cell biology of viral infection, novel approaches to studying and preventing viral infections with a focus on innovative vaccine strategies, the use of imaging technologies to investigate virus-host interactions, and the development of potent antiviral therapies for chronic viral infections, illustrated by curative therapy of chronic hepatitis C and long-term prevention of HIV-1 infection. The plenary sessions were complemented by 21 parallel workshops covering all areas of virology, as well as several satellite sessions. Many of these were organized by the Young Society of Virology (jGfV), which is dedicated to promoting the next generation of virologists. This report summarizes the presentations delivered by the plenary speakers and provides a brief overview of the activities in the various sessions, including the prize-winning contributions presented at the meeting.
PUBMED_42682386	PubMed	2026	The 3Fs as conditions of being: relational ontology and equine welfare in disaster response and reconciliation. Disaster relief work requires the collaboration of many stakeholders and can be viewed through a One Health lens, emphasising transdisciplinarity and an openness to different ways of knowing as well as an appreciation of the interdependence of human, animal, environmental health, and welfare. This perspective piece provides an autoethnographic account of a wildfire response in Western Canada in which a herd of free-ranging horses was rescued outside of conventional disaster management protocol. Through lived experience, the convergence between equine welfare, reconciliation, and relational ontology became visible. This has implications both for disaster management and for Fraser's 3Fs of equine welfare, offering a philosophical expansion that recognises conditions of being that, together, co-constitute the potential for flourishing. The perspective advanced here aims to shift equine welfare practice from the management of discrete variables toward a practice that is defined by relational integrity and accountability, in which humans and horses are bounded beings, where flourishing results from honouring the dynamic and entangled system-understood as a shared ground of being-that humans, animals, and land belong to. This work contributes to One Health approaches by foregrounding and exemplifying relational knowledge, which is often excluded from traditionally positivist disciplines. This work situates equine welfare within broader ethical movements, including decolonial projects, efforts toward multispecies justice, and the development of One Health approaches. This alignment extends responsibility beyond individual caregivers and invites a reorientation of welfare science toward a relational ontology, offering a framework that is both practically grounded and philosophically expansive.
PUBMED_42737978	PubMed	2026	The Biotechnological Applications of Marine Bacteria. Marine bacteria represent a vast and largely untapped resource for biotechnological innovation, offering solutions to global challenges in health, sustainability, and environmental conservation. The ocean's unique conditions have driven marine bacteria to evolve diverse metabolic capabilities, resulting in the production of bioactive compounds, enzymes, and other metabolites with wide-ranging applications. Recent advances in high-throughput sequencing, metagenomics, and analytical chemistry have unlocked new opportunities for leveraging these microorganisms in fields as varied as medicine, agriculture, and bioremediation. This review highlights the role of marine bacteria in the One Health framework, showcasing their contributions to antimicrobial discovery, nutraceutical development, pathogen biocontrol, and environmental cleanup, including microplastic degradation. This review also examines emerging methodologies such as microbiome mining and advanced culturing techniques, which hold the key to realizing the full potential of marine bacteria in a sustainable bioeconomy. By bridging fundamental research with applied sciences, marine biotechnology promises to deliver transformative impacts on human, animal, and environmental health.
PUBMED_42671719	PubMed	2026	The COVID-19 pandemic influenced the temporal dynamics of antimicrobial resistance markers and bacterial community across urban wastewater treatment plants. Urban wastewater systems represent important interfaces between human activity and the environmental occurrence of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) markers. We assessed the temporal dynamics of intI1, ermB, and the 16 S rRNA gene by quantitative PCR across three wastewater systems (EPC, CJC, and JW) in Fortaleza, Brazil, from November 2021 to November 2023. Bacterial communities were additionally characterized by 16 S rRNA gene metabarcoding in 18 samples collected in December 2021 and January 2022. A synchronized decline in 16 S rRNA gene and intI1 concentrations beginning in late 2022 was observed across all three wastewater systems, suggesting a shift toward lower microbial abundance. The ermB gene showed higher and more variable concentrations during part of the pandemic period, followed by convergence toward lower levels; however, the absence of antimicrobial-consumption data precluded attribution of this pattern to changes in macrolide selective pressure. Normalized antimicrobial resistance marker abundances were comparatively stable at EPC and JW but more variable at CJC. EPC exhibited the highest ASV richness, whereas CJC and JW showed greater diversity according to Shannon and inverse Simpson indices. Beta-diversity analyses identified wastewater system as the principal factor associated with bacterial community structure, while the effect of sampling period was smaller and metric-dependent. Neither ermB nor intI1 was individually associated with community composition, although intI1 showed a limited effect after adjustment for wastewater system in one model. Physicochemical parameters were not significantly associated with normalized marker abundances in the exploratory paired analysis. Arcobacter, Acinetobacter, and other potentially relevant genera were detected, but no direct associations between these taxa and the monitored AMR markers could be established. These findings highlight the value of integrating longitudinal qPCR, microbiome profiling, and environmental characterization to improve the interpretation of targeted AMR markers in One Health wastewater surveillance.
PUBMED_42738562	PubMed	2026	The Global Prevalence of Tuberculosis Infection in Buffaloes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Bovine tuberculosis (bTB), caused by Mycobacterium bovis (M. bovis), is a chronic zoonotic disease with buffaloes as maintenance hosts, yet global pooled prevalence of bTB in buffaloes has not been systematically quantified. This systematic review and meta-analysis estimated the global prevalence, distribution, and risk factors (spatio-temporal, geographical and socioeconomic, host characteristics, and research design and methodology) of bTB in buffaloes. Six electronic databases (PubMed, ScienceDirect, Web of Science, CNKI, VIP, and WanFang) were systematically searched for studies published between 1963 and 2025. Of 1731 records, 104 studies (385,616 buffaloes, 17 countries) were included. Estimates a global pooled prevalence of 7.4% for buffaloes, which is higher than recent global estimates for cattle (reported at 3.98% and, in a 2024 meta-analysis, 3.27% at the animal level); this cross-species comparison should be interpreted cautiously given differences in diagnostics, regions and time periods. Key risk factors identified were advanced age (15-20 years, 34.2%), draught use (28.0%), free-ranging management (12.0%), large herd size (9.9%), low-income economies (13.7%), and tropical savanna climate (10.1%). Publication bias was detected but did not substantially alter the overall pooled prevalence estimate. The persistently high burden in Africa and developing countries highlights the urgent need for integrated One Health surveillance and targeted control strategies.
PUBMED_42764260	PubMed	2026	The Toll of Daily Dehumanization: Elucidating the Role of Dehumanizing Deindividuation by Partner in the Individual and Relational Well-Being of Women During Pregnancy. The purpose of this study was to examine associations between daily experiences of intimate partner dehumanizing deindividuation and pregnant women's emotional and relational well-being. We also examined uncompassionate self-responding as a path through which dehumanizing deindividuation exerts its negative effects. A community sample of 154 pregnant women in the United States completed daily surveys over 14 days assessing dehumanizing deindividuation experiences from partner, negative and positive affect, relationship satisfaction, and uncompassionate self-responding. Dynamic structural equation modeling (DSEM) was used to examine same-day and lagged associations among these constructs, controlling for prior-day levels. Same-day dehumanizing deindividuation was associated with increased negative affect, decreased positive affect, reduced relationship satisfaction, and increased uncompassionate self-responding. Uncompassionate self-responding was also associated with more negative affect as well as less positive affect and relationship satisfaction. No next-day spillover effects were observed. Taken together, dehumanizing treatment from an intimate partner is associated with immediate decrements in emotional and relational functioning, and these experiences appear to undermine individual and relational health directly and potentially through internalization of uncompassionate responses. Interventions aimed at reducing dehumanizing deindividuation and uncompassionate self-responding should be explored.
PUBMED_42750927	PubMed	2026	The Untapped Potential of One Health in Somalia: A Call for Cross-Sectoral Action Against Persistent Infectious Diseases. Somalia faces recurrent infectious-disease threats shaped by interacting human, animal, environmental, and health-system vulnerabilities, including climate shocks, displacement, livestock-dependent livelihoods, weak water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) conditions, zoonotic risks, antimicrobial resistance, and uneven surveillance and laboratory capacity. This policy-oriented narrative commentary examines these interconnected risks through a One Health and health-system risk-management lens and proposes a region-sensitive framework for prevention, preparedness, surveillance, and response. Its central argument is that recurrent outbreaks should not be viewed solely as isolated disease-specific emergencies, but as manifestations of interconnected risks that require coordinated One Health action. The commentary draws on a targeted, non-systematic synthesis of recent Somalia-specific peer-reviewed studies, surveillance updates, humanitarian reports, and institutional policy documents, supplemented by broader One Health guidance where relevant. Recent evidence includes more than 8,900 acute watery diarrhea/cholera cases by the end of 2025, 3,655 diphtheria cases across 65 districts in 2025, and 1,665 suspected measles cases during the first four weeks of 2026. The proposed conceptual framework links human health, animal health and zoonoses, and environmental and climate risks with six core system functions: multisectoral governance; integrated surveillance and data sharing; laboratory and veterinary systems; workforce capacity and community engagement; climate- and WASH-informed preparedness; and sustainable financing. Somalia has already established important One Health foundations, including multisectoral coordination, zoonotic disease prioritization, human disease surveillance, and an International Health Regulations-Performance of Veterinary Services (IHR-PVS) roadmap. The central policy proposition is to build on these foundations through a region-sensitive, government-led One Health system linking federal, state, district, and community levels. Embedding measurable One Health functions within existing preparedness and response structures may support more anticipatory, geographically responsive, and coordinated risk management while preserving essential disease-specific programs.
PUBMED_42752813	PubMed	2026	The agroenvironmental-clinical link of Proteus mirabilis: Genomic epidemiology, clonal relationships, and shared resistance and virulence profiles. Proteus mirabilis is an opportunistic pathogen frequently associated with urinary tract infections (UTIs), with its pathogenicity driven by coordinated virulence traits such as adhesion, biofilm formation, and toxin production. The systemic emergence of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) within this species raises critical concerns regarding its persistence across clinical and environmental niches. This study investigated the virulence profiles, AMR determinants, and molecular epidemiology of P. mirabilis isolates recovered from retail vegetables and human community-acquired UTIs (CA-UTIs) in southern Brazil. A total of 310 isolates were analyzed (110 from vegetables and 200 from UTIs). Multidrug resistance was observed in 36.6-42.0% of vegetable isolates and 16.0% of UTI isolates, while extended-spectrum -lactamase (ESBL) production reached 32.0% in the vegetable group. Notably, the carbapenemase gene blaKPC-2 was identified in vegetable isolates, representing a critical food safety concern. High-consequence resistance genes, including blaCTX-M variants, fosA3, and qnrD, were widely distributed. Furthermore, all isolates harbored multi-element virulence profiles-particularly genes encoding fimbriae, proteases, and iron acquisition systems-and exhibited strong or very strong biofilm-forming phenotypes. Clonal analysis revealed tight genetic relatedness between vegetable and clinical isolates, including indistinguishable profiles. Whole-genome sequencing identified shared sequence types (STs), most notably the high-risk clone ST773, alongside internationally reported lineages such as ST135 and ST336. Moreover, conserved mobile genetic environments flanking blaKPC-2 were structurally characterized. These findings demonstrate that food-associated P. mirabilis serves as an active agroenvironmental reservoir for virulent and multidrug-resistant lineages, posing an unmonitored risk for zoonotic dissemination and human infection within the One Health framework.
PUBMED_42778602	PubMed	2026	The anthropogenic fingerprint on emerging infectious diseases. Emerging infectious diseases are a hallmark of the Anthropocene1,2. Human-driven ecosystem changes and human-wildlife-livestock contact can drive the emergence of zoonotic and vector-borne diseases3-5, but how much these processes shape landscapes of outbreak risk is poorly understood, beyond a few well-studied systems6-8. Here we consolidate 58,319 outbreak event records for 32 diseases and systematically test how 16 hypothesized social and environmental drivers impact outbreak geographies, while accounting for detection and reporting biases. We show that outbreak risks are typically highest in mosaic landscapes where people and livestock live alongside forests and fragmented ecosystems. These combined factors, along with long-term declines in precipitation, share strong impacts across several vector-borne diseases (for example, dengue, Lyme disease and zoonotic arboviruses). By contrast, directly transmitted zoonoses (for example, Ebola and mpox) share few common drivers, and the impacts of most other anthropogenic pressures (for example, deforestation, climate warming and agricultural intensification) vary widely between diseases. Most consistently, the observed geography of outbreaks is shaped by healthcare access: reporting declines by a median of 32% (range across diseases: 1.2-96.7%) for each additional hour's travel time from a health facility. Our findings underscore that infectious disease spillover and emergence are multi-causal, and that no one-size-fits-all strategy can prevent epidemics and pandemics. Ecosystem-based public health interventions9 should always follow system-specific evidence, and be paired with greater investment in health systems and One Health pathogen surveillance.
PUBMED_42707105	PubMed	2026	The application of imaging mass cytometry in the immune microenvironment of alveolar echinococcosis. BACKGROUND: Hepatic alveolar echinococcosis (HAE) is a chronic parasitic disease caused by infection with the larval form of Echinococcus multilocularis, characterised by the formation of invasive lesions in the liver, which involve the proliferation of immune system cells in response to the pathogen. Although surgical resection is the treatment of choice, patients in advanced stages often lose the opportunity for surgery, and drug therapy has limited efficacy. The immune microenvironment plays a key role in tumour progression, but its spatial heterogeneity in HAE has not yet been systematically elucidated. METHODS: Tissue samples for this study were obtained from the tissue proximal to the lesion and matched distal liver tissue from three patients with HAE. Imaging mass cytometry (IMC) analysis was performed using an antibody panel comprising 28 immunological markers. PhenoGraph clustering and t-SNE dimensionality reduction techniques were applied to classify and visualise single-cell data, and to analyse spatial interactions between cells. RESULTS: Both the tissue proximal to the lesion and the distal liver tissue exhibited significant immune cell infiltration and marked spatial heterogeneity. The tissue proximal to the lesion was characterised primarily by activated CD8+ T cells (Cluster 3/19) and CD56+ NK cells (Cluster 17/18), presenting an immune-activated state and forming tertiary lymphoid structure (TLS)-like structures. B cells (Cluster 1) were reduced in number in the proximal lesion, whilst macrophages (Cluster 6) showed significant colocalisation with B cells, suggesting that macrophages may regulate B cell function through processes such as antigen presentation. CONCLUSION: This study utilised IMC technology to reveal the complex landscape and heterogeneity of the HAE immune microenvironment, providing new targets and insights for the development of immunotherapeutic strategies for this disease.
PUBMED_42687962	PubMed	2026	The associations between family interference with work and depression: the mediating role of stress and satisfaction in Saudi Arabia. Building on conservation of resources theory (Hobfoll, 2001) and spillover theory (Edwards and Rothbard, 2000; Staines, 1980), we conducted a survey study (N 794) to examine the direct and indirect associations of family interference with work (FIW) through job stress, family stress, job satisfaction, and marital satisfaction on depression among dual earners in Saudi Arabia. The results indicated both time- and strain-based FIW were positive predictors of depression. Additionally, both job stress and family stress mediated the associations between FIW (time-, strain-, and behavior-based) and depression. However, marital satisfaction only mediated the relationship between strain-based FIW and depression, whereas job satisfaction was a nonsignificant mediator. Our study underscores the importance of family-to-work conflict and stress perceptions in impacting mental health. Theoretical and practical implications were further discussed.
PUBMED_42742206	PubMed	2026	The canine gut microbiome as a translational model for human health and aging. The domestic dog is increasingly recognized as a complementary translational model for microbiome research relevant to human health while also offering direct benefits for veterinary medicine. Dogs share environments and dietary exposures with humans and show substantial taxonomic and gene-content similarity to the human gut microbiome, although the apparent degree of similarity depends strongly on whether read recruitment, gene-catalog overlap, or functional overlap is assessed. Dogs also develop spontaneous chronic enteropathies, obesity-associated metabolic dysfunction, cancers, cognitive dysfunction, and behavioral disorders in which gut microbial changes can be examined under clinically realistic conditions. Their shorter, breed- and body-size-dependent lifespan permits repeated sampling across development, aging, disease progression, and treatment within practical timeframes. Breed structure, full-sibling cohorts, controlled dietary interventions, and access to clinically indicated samples from multiple anatomical compartments can strengthen selected study designs, although they do not provide the tighter genetic, environmental, and microbial control achievable in rodents. Here, we evaluate the research questions for which canine cohorts are especially informative, synthesize evidence linking canine and human disease-associated microbiomes, and critically assess aging, causal inference, and One Health applications. Major limitations include the need for breed and body-size stratification, heterogeneous diet and husbandry, incomplete treatment histories, the lack of routinely available gnotobiotic canine systems, and gaps in canine-specific reference resources. The canine system is therefore most informative when study designs exploit its clinical realism while acknowledging the tighter experimental control offered by reductionist models, positioning the dog as a complementary rather than a universally superior model.
PUBMED_42678954	PubMed	2026	The cooperative behavioral game of urban waste reduction network considering environmental cost-sharing. This study aims to identify key intervention points for urban solid waste reduction and assign corresponding environmental responsibilities. It further examines how enterprises engage in waste reduction and cooperate with one another in this process. The research integrates Material Flow Analysis (MFA) and Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) to locate critical nodes for waste reduction. An evolutionary game model is developed, where enterprises are modeled as nodes in a scale-free network and interact with neighboring nodes. MATLAB simulations are conducted to evaluate the effects of cost-sharing, benefit allocation, penalty mechanisms, and spillover effects on cooperative behavior in waste reduction. The results reveal that moderate penalty mechanisms and positive spillover effects promote multi-subjects cooperative waste reduction. While cost-sharing and benefit allocation mechanisms also enhance cooperation, their effectiveness depends on maintaining parameter values within reasonable ranges. Furthermore, the impact of these mechanisms varies across networks of different scales, suggesting that a one-size-fits-all approach may be ineffective. This study provides a novel integration of MFA, LCA, and evolutionary game theory within a network framework to explore enterprise-level cooperation in waste reduction. It offers actionable insights into designing differentiated incentive mechanisms based on network characteristics, contributing to more effective urban waste management strategies.
PUBMED_42744156	PubMed	2026	The horned mason bee, Osmia cornuta, as a managed orchard pollinator: current status and future perspectives. Osmia cornuta is a cavity-nesting solitary bee that occurs across most of continental Europe. Because of its early activity period, its strong affinity for Rosaceae fruit tree pollen and its high pollinating effectiveness, methods have been developed to manage this species as a crop pollinator. In this review, we identify the main challenges associated with O. cornuta management: synchronisation of population emergence with the blooming period of the focal orchard, female establishment at the nesting sites and pesticide exposure. We discuss how to address these challenges and suggest research avenues and management practices to increase population returns in orchard environments. As with other managed pollinators, the deployment of O. cornuta populations may have negative effects on wild pollinators, including competition for floral resources, parasite and pathogen spillover and genetic introgression. We argue that, because of the low densities used, these threats are relatively small when managing O. cornuta. In addition, we emphasise the advantages of working with local populations and the need to establish a legal framework to regulate Osmia trade. Due to the low densities used, and because the orchard management measures proposed to enhance O. cornuta populations are also beneficial to other pollinators, the management of O. cornuta is compatible with the promotion of wild pollinator communities within an integrative and diversified crop pollination approach.
PUBMED_42774761	PubMed	2026	The microbiome and non-occupational human-animal interactions: a scoping review. Human-animal interactions may impact the composition of the human microbiome. This can then influence human physical, mental, and social wellbeing. This scoping review synthesizes the literature on the impacts of intentional, non-occupational human-animal interactions on the human microbiome. Six databases (PubMed, CINAHL, PsycINFO, Web of Science, CAB Abstracts, and ProQuest Dissertations and Theses) were searched using keywords for human-animal interactions and microbiomes. Database searching resulted in 2,946 publications. Publications were screened according to the following inclusion criteria: (1) published in English, (2) peer-reviewed article or dissertation presenting empirical data, (3) studies humans engaging in intentional, non-occupational interaction with animals, and (4) compares human microbiome composition before and after human-animal interactions or compares humans that interact with animals to humans that do not interact with animals. Screening resulted in 30 relevant publications. Of these, 24 reported a significant effect of human-animal interactions on microbiome composition. However, there were notable gaps in the reporting of demographics and methodology, such as length of human-animal interaction, species of animal, and variable 16S regions of focus. To better understand the impacts of human-animal interactions on the human microbiome, future studies should include detailed reporting of both human-animal interactions and microbiome analysis methods.
PUBMED_42691279	PubMed	2026	The perceived whiteness of artificial intelligence. Artificial intelligence (AI) systems increasingly serve as advisors, evaluators, and decision-makers, yet little is known about how people perceive AI as a social entity. Across five primary studies and eight supplementary studies, we show that people assign racial identities to AI systems, overwhelmingly perceiving them as White-even though these systems provide no visual, vocal, or identity cues from which race might ordinarily be inferred. Using forced-choice, open-ended, and implicit reverse-correlation measures, Studies 1 and 2 demonstrate that AI is explicitly and implicitly associated with Whiteness across diverse samples. Study 3 extends these findings beyond the United States, showing that AI is perceived as White in Japan and India. Study 4 examines the implications of AI racialization, showing that perceiving an AI system as more White is associated with greater trust in and persuasiveness of its recommendations. Supplementary studies identified two potential mechanisms: stereotype spillover linking intelligence with Whiteness and ecosystem-based inferences based on beliefs about who creates, trains, and uses AI. Building on this account, Study 5 provides causal evidence by isolating a key ecosystem cue-the racial composition of AI training data. Participants assigned less cognitively demanding tasks to AI systems described as trained on Black and Latino data than to otherwise identical systems trained on White or unspecified data. Together, these findings show that AI is not perceived as socially neutral but instead acquires racial meanings associated with credibility, authority, and capability, demonstrating how social categories shape perceptions of novel technological entities beyond their underlying algorithmic properties. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved).
PUBMED_42778949	PubMed	2026	The rare and the common: habitat suitability and niche segregation of Anopheles algeriensis (Theobald, 1903) and Anopheles claviger s.s. (Meigen, 1804) in North-German peatlands is shaped by distinct landscape-weather interactions. BACKGROUND: Peatland rewetting is a cost-effective strategy for climate change mitigation and biodiversity conservation, yet its potential to alter mosquito species composition and abundance carries implications for public and veterinary health. Anopheles algeriensis and Anopheles claviger s.s. are broadly distributed across European wetlands, including peatlands, but despite their vector potential, their specific ecological niches and responses to rewetting remain poorly understood. METHODS: Adult mosquitoes were sampled biweekly across two consecutive seasons at 15 sites within a fen peatland landscape in North-East Germany and identified morphologically. Anopheline specimens outside the Anopheles maculipennis complex underwent further molecular identification. Sampling sites were grouped into three habitat types, wet peatlands, drained peatlands, and settlements, based on key peatland characteristics. Subsequently, generalised linear mixed models were used to assess species-specific responses to habitat type and their interactions with relevant weather variables. RESULTS: A total of 278 An. algeriensis individuals were collected, with significantly higher abundances observed in wet peatlands than in other habitat types. Mean temperature and mean relative humidity were positively correlated with abundance. The former independent of habitat types, the latter was modulated by them. Cumulative precipitation was negatively correlated with abundance, varying in strength across habitat types. In contrast, 950 An. claviger s.s. specimens were most abundant in settlements. Mean relative humidity was positively correlated with abundance in settlements, but negatively in other habitat types. Minimum temperature during trap nights was positively correlated with abundance in settlements, and in wet peatlands, but negatively in drained peatlands. CONCLUSIONS: Distinct distribution and abundance patterns driven by landscape-weather interaction were identified for two Anopheles vectors. Our findings demonstrate species-specific responses to peatland habitat types and highlight the need to integrate vector surveillance into rewetting and management strategies within a One Health framework.
PUBMED_42685544	PubMed	2026	Three decades of mercury research in the Tapaj s River Basin, Brazilian Amazon: Scientific progress, remaining uncertainties, and future challenges. Over the past three decades, the Tapaj s River Basin, Brazilian Amazon, has become a major setting for investigating chronic environmental mercury (Hg) exposure, predominantly associated with dietary methylmercury (MeHg) intake through fish consumption. This critical review synthesizes Hg research conducted between 1990 and 2026, tracing scientific progress from contamination sources to human exposure, health effects, biological susceptibility, and emerging environmental health challenges. Early studies identified artisanal and small-scale gold mining, the remobilization of legacy Hg through biogeochemical processes, and fish consumption as central components linking environmental Hg sources to human exposure. Subsequent investigations expanded this evidence by examining health effects, biological susceptibility, nutritional interactions, and multiple environmental stressors. Although Hg concentrations in piscivorous fish have remained persistently elevated, biomonitoring studies suggest a gradual decline in Hg exposure in some communities, potentially reflecting changes in dietary patterns, socioeconomic conditions, sampling characteristics, and study locations. Despite major advances in characterizing contamination and exposure, less progress has been achieved in understanding long-term health consequences. Most epidemiological studies remain descriptive or cross-sectional, limiting causal inference and characterization of exposure-response relationships. Neurological, sensory, visual, and motor alterations remain the most consistently reported outcomes, yet uncertainties persist regarding causality, individual susceptibility, and mechanisms underlying variability among exposed populations. The contrasting findings of the Faroe Islands and Seychelles longitudinal cohorts illustrate these challenges. Recent studies increasingly recognize that Hg toxicity is shaped by complex exposomes involving selenium (Se), co-exposure to lead (Pb) and other contaminants, nutritional transition, infectious diseases, climate change, and social determinants of health. Future progress will require adequately powered longitudinal cohorts, population-specific reference values, biomarkers of exposure, effect and susceptibility, and integration of multi-omics, exposome, and One Health approaches to strengthen causal inference and improve environmental health policies for Amazonian populations.
PUBMED_42717344	PubMed	2026	Tick-borne pathogens in golden jackals (Canis aureus) from Armenia. BACKGROUND: Golden jackals (Canis aureus) are expanding their range across Europe and Western Asia, frequently inhabiting agricultural and peri-urban areas where they interface with humans and domestic animals. PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to assess their potential role as reservoirs for tick-borne pathogens in Armenia, Transcaucasia. METHODS: Between August 2024 and March 2026, blood samples were collected from 77 golden jackals across six administrative regions of Armenia (Lori, Tavush, Armavir, Ararat, Vayots Dzor, and Syunik). PCR followed by reverse line blot (RLB) hybridization was employed to simultaneously screen for bacterial and protistan pathogens, including Anaplasma, Borrelia, Ehrlichia, and Rickettsia, and Babesia and Theileria species, respectively. RESULTS: Six zoonotic pathogens were detected: Rickettsia helvetica (16.9%), Borrelia burgdorferi sensu stricto (3.9%), Babesia canis (3.9%), Rickettsia raoultii (2.6%), Candidatus Neoehrlichia mikurensis (2.6%), and Borrelia afzelii (1.3%). Co-infections were detected in 7.8% of all samples (35.3% of pathogen-positive samples), including one triple co-infection with R. helvetica, B. burgdorferi s.s., and Ca. N. mikurensis. Statistically significant associations were observed between R. helvetica and B. burgdorferi s.s. (rtet 0.915) and between R. helvetica and R. raoultii (rtet 0.878). Rickettsia helvetica prevalence was significantly higher in females than in males (27.8% vs 7.3%; p 0.030). Age-related trends suggested higher overall infection rates in adults (32.3%) compared to juveniles (15.2%; p 0.097). CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first molecular evidence of tick-borne pathogens in golden jackals from Transcaucasia, highlighting them as potential reservoir hosts for zoonotic pathogens with One Health significance.
PUBMED_42762379	PubMed	2026	Tick-host-virus triad in Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever transmission: global patterns across vector and reservoir species. Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) is a widely distributed tick-borne orthonairovirus and an important public health threat across Africa, Asia, Europe, and the Middle East. This narrative review synthesizes evidence on the tick-host-virus transmission system, with emphasis on Hyalomma vectors, vertebrate hosts, viral genomic diversity, vector competence, occupational exposure, molecular diagnostics, and One Health surveillance. Published systematic reviews and meta-analyses are used as secondary evidence sources; no de novo pooled meta-analysis was performed in this review. CCHFV comprises a tripartite RNA genome with substantial segment-specific diversity and frequent reassortment, complicating lineage assignment and molecular epidemiology. Hyalomma ticks are the principal recognized vectors, while domestic livestock can develop transient, generally asymptomatic viremia that supports tick-host-tick transmission. Human risk is concentrated in occupational and healthcare settings involving ticks, livestock, infected tissues, or infected patients. The geographic distribution of Hyalomma ticks is changing in parts of Europe and may expand northward under suitable environmental conditions, although detection of adventitious ticks should be distinguished from evidence of established populations. Effective prevention requires integrated vector control, personal protection, livestock and tick surveillance, genomic monitoring, rapid diagnostics, and coordinated One Health response. Important evidence gaps remain in non-Hyalomma vector competence, standardized animal serosurveillance, genomic sampling, climate-driven establishment of Hyalomma populations, and validation of point-of-care diagnostics across viral lineages.
PUBMED_42784359	PubMed	2026	Time Series and Pattern of Dog Bites and Rabies in the Ashanti Region, Ghana, 2009-2019: A Call for Inter-Sectoral Collaboration in the Fight Against Rabies. Dog-mediated human rabies is a vaccine-preventable neglected zoonotic disease, causing thousands of deaths every year across Africa and Asia. Information to generate the appropriate attention and action to avert human rabies is lacking due to disaggregation of available data. This study sought to understand the burden of dog-mediated rabies transmission and response patterns in Ghana's Ashanti Region, and analyzed dog-bite surveillance, rabies laboratory investigations, and hospital visitation data from 2009 to 2019. A total of 442 bite incidents were recorded, with most occurring in the Kumasi metropolis, particularly in the Oforikrom and Manhyia sub-metros. Many victims sought healthcare outside their bite-incident districts, often at the Manhyia Government Hospital, likely due to vaccine availability. Bite incidents were generally reported promptly within two days, although final investigations took about fourteen days. The sale of implicated dogs for human consumption during observation periods posed an additional rabies risk. There was a 67.53% positivity for animal rabies (n 156/231) in laboratory investigations, and dogs accounted for most confirmed cases (141/210), though livestock and non-human primates were also affected. More than 70% of dog-bite victims were linked to rabies-positive animals, showing a significant association between bites and confirmed rabies cases. Reported dog-bite frequency varied considerably over time, with the highest monthly frequencies occurring between 2010 and 2013, and with a sustained positive seasonal effect from August to November within a year. The findings highlight that dog-mediated rabies remains a major public health threat in the region and emphasize the need for improved One Health investigations, surveillance, and public education to reduce rabies transmission and exposure risks.
PUBMED_42680057	PubMed	2026	Tracking Blastocystis sp. in mussels from Northern France in a One Health context: Seasonal dynamics, implications in marine fecal pollution and risk in human health. Blastocystis sp. is an intestinal protozoan with recognized zoonotic potential that is increasingly investigated in animals closely associated with humans or intended for food production. However, studies on mollusks remain limited, despite their high filtration capacity and ability to accumulate biological contaminants, making them valuable indicators of environmental pollution. Within a One Health framework, this study investigated the seasonal circulation of Blastocystis sp. in a coastal ecosystem in northern France through the analysis of mussels, cattle, and river water samples using real-time PCR. A total of 892 samples were analyzed, of which 14.5% tested positive. Mussels showed a prevalence of 22.7%, with marked seasonal variations suggesting fluctuations in environmental contamination. Cattle exhibited the highest prevalence (38.3%), while 18.8% of river water samples were contaminated. Sanger and next-generation sequencing of positive samples revealed substantial genetic diversity, with 14 subtypes (STs) identified in mussels, 8 in cattle, and 3 in water samples. The lack of host-specific STs, together with the low parasite loads assessed in mussels, suggests that these organisms act as passive accumulators rather than true hosts. Moreover, the broad ST diversity observed highlights ongoing circulation of Blastocystis sp. within this aquatic environment and widespread fecal contamination consistent with human, bovine, and avian sources. Overall, mussels appear to be effective bioindicators of multisource fecal pollution across interconnected ecosystems, emphasizing the potential risk of exposure to Blastocystis sp. through the handling or consumption of raw shellfish and the importance of strengthened environmental and public health surveillance.
PUBMED_42684862	PubMed	2026	Transferable optrA-mediated linezolid resistance in enterococci from high-altitude river sediments of Gilgit-Baltistan, Pakistan. UNLABELLED: Environmental dissemination of antimicrobial resistance is a growing global concern. This study investigated the occurrence, genetic context, and mobility of the oxazolidinone resistance genes in enterococci isolated from high-altitude river sediments in the Gilgit-Baltistan region of Pakistan. A total of 17 florfenicol-resistant enterococci were recovered from 3 of the 12 sampling sites analyzed. Four multidrug-resistant strains (two Enterococcus faecium, one E. faecalis, and one E. hirae) harboring the optrA gene were selected for whole-genome sequencing using Illumina and Nanopore platforms. Genomic analyses showed that optrA was plasmid-borne in all isolates and co-localized with additional resistance genes, including macrolide, phenicol, and tetracycline resistance determinants. The optrA genetic context was frequently associated with insertion sequences, suggesting their role in the mobilization of multidrug-resistance elements. Mini-translocatable units of the optrA genetic context were detected as circular forms in two of four strains, further supporting their mobility potential. Conjugation assays demonstrated successful horizontal transfer of the optrA gene mediating linezolid resistance, with transfer frequencies ranging from 2.03 10 to 6.36 10 transconjugants per recipient cell. optrA-carrying plasmids remained stable after serial passages without antibiotic pressure. Phylogenetic analysis showed that isolates belonged to distinct sequence types and clustered with strains of diverse geographic and ecological origins, suggesting dissemination of optrA across different genetic backgrounds rather than clonal expansion. The occurrence of linezolid-resistant enterococci in high-altitude river sediments suggests their widespread distribution and emphasizes the need for broader environmental surveillance programs to monitor clinically relevant resistances even in remote ecosystems. IMPORTANCE: This study provides important insights into the environmental dissemination of antimicrobial resistance by demonstrating the occurrence and genetic diversity of clinically relevant resistance determinants in enterococci isolated from remote high-altitude river sediments. The findings emphasize that natural environments could serve as reservoirs and exchange hubs for antimicrobial resistance, even in ecosystems with limited direct anthropogenic impact. Therefore, integrated One Health surveillance strategies that include environmental compartments alongside human and animal populations are required to better monitor and mitigate the emergence of clinically significant resistant bacteria.
PUBMED_42676817	PubMed	2026	UiO-type metal - organic frameworks as a platform for hydrogen storage studies. Hydrogen has attracted significant attention as a clean energy carrier due to its high gravimetric energy density and zero-carbon emissions at the point of use. However, its low volumetric energy density poses major challenges for safe and efficient storage. In this context, porous materials, particularly metal - organic frameworks (MOFs), have been extensively investigated as promising hydrogen-storage media because of their high surface areas, tunable pore environments, and structural diversity. Among them, Zr-based Universitetet i Oslo (UiO)-type MOFs have emerged as important platforms for hydrogen storage studies because of their exceptional framework stability, high synthetic versatility, and compatibility with the incorporation of functional species such as metal nanoparticles and hydrides. This review focuses on recent advances in hydrogen storage studies using UiO-type MOFs. First, the fundamental synthesis strategies and structural characteristics of UiO frameworks are outlined. Subsequently, key concepts of physisorption-based hydrogen storage, including adsorption mechanisms and evaluation metrics, are introduced. The hydrogen storage performance of pristine, functionalized, and densified UiO-type MOFs is then discussed, highlighting the influence of pore structure, linker functionality, and framework densification on hydrogen uptake. Beyond physisorption, chemisorption-related approaches, including spillover-assisted hydrogen storage and nanoconfinement of hydride species within UiO-type MOFs, are also highlighted. These studies demonstrate that UiO-type MOFs not only function as effective hydrogen adsorbents but also serve as versatile platforms for tuning hydrogen interactions. Finally, current challenges and future perspectives are discussed, providing insights into the development of next-generation hydrogen storage materials.
PUBMED_42775161	PubMed	2026	Unlocking Knowledge: Designing an Infectious Diseases-Themed Escape Room for Medical Student and Resident Education. BACKGROUND: Infectious diseases (ID) education faces challenges with learner engagement, confidence, and specialty recruitment. Game-based learning, including educational escape rooms, offers an innovative strategy to increase engagement while reinforcing clinically relevant concepts. We designed an ID-themed escape room integrated into monthly clinical rotation curriculum for medical students and internal medicine residents. METHODS: General and targeted needs assessment informed 8 learning objectives addressing board-relevant topics and common clinical errors: isolation precautions, zoonoses, empiric antimicrobial selection, laboratory safety, organism identification, molecular diagnostic interpretation, sexually transmitted infections, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus-active antimicrobials. The physical outbreak-themed escape room used a hybrid puzzle structure with 8 objective-aligned puzzles. Pilot testing by ID faculty, fellows, and medical students informed clarity, flow, and timing. Learners completed postactivity Likert-scale surveys assessing engagement, enjoyment, confidence, and perceived educational value. RESULTS: The escape room was implemented in April 2024. Twenty-five learners completed the postactivity survey. All participants agreed or strongly agreed that the activity was engaging, fun, enjoyable, and that they would like to participate in similar educational activities in the future. Most learners agreed or strongly agreed that the activity improved understanding, was a valuable addition to their learning experience, and increased confidence. CONCLUSIONS: This ID-themed escape room provided an engaging, learner-centered approach to reinforcing clinical reasoning, antimicrobial decision-making, and infectious diseases concepts. Intentional alignment of learning objectives with puzzle design offers a reproducible roadmap for educators seeking to integrate escape rooms into clinical curricula. Future work should evaluate knowledge acquisition, scalability, sustainability, and effects on interest in ID careers.
PUBMED_42748132	PubMed	2026	Unveiling the seasonal dynamics of leishmaniosis: High-resolution monthly potential risk mapping and future expansion of Leishmania infantum in Europe. BACKGROUND: Zoonotic leishmaniosis, caused by Leishmania infantum, is a major public health and veterinary concern in Europe. Traditionally restricted to the Mediterranean basin, the disease is currently undergoing a rapid geographical expansion towards Central and Northern Europe, driven by climate change and the plasticity of its vectors. Current epidemiological surveillance often relies on static annual prevalence maps, which fail to capture the critical intra-annual fluctuations in transmission risk. This study aims to bridge this gap by developing the first high-resolution spatiotemporal analysis of L. infantum potential infection risk across the entire European continent, providing a dynamic tool to optimize control strategies under a One Health framework. METHODS: We developed Ecological Niche Models (MaxEnt) for the two primary European vectors, Phlebotomus perniciosus and Phlebotomus perfiliewi. To estimate the transmission capability, we integrated these habitat suitability models with a biological model of parasite development (Rioux's algorithm), which calculates the infection rate based on daily mean temperatures (10-30 C thermal window). This integration allowed for the generation of continuous annual and monthly potential risk maps. Furthermore, we projected the potential infection risk to the year 2100 under the SSP5-8.5 climate change scenario to quantify future range shifts and potential expansion into non-endemic territories. RESULTS: The models exhibited excellent predictive performance (AUC 0.900), with annual mean temperature being the dominant driver for both vectors. The results confirmed high endemic risk in the Mediterranean basin but revealed significant emerging risk zones in the Balkans, Romania and the Southern Plateau of Spain. The monthly analysis unveiled a dynamic seasonality: transmission is latent in winter, restricted to southern coastal refuges, but expands latitudinally during spring and summer, covering most of Central Europe before retracting in autumn. Future projections for 2100 indicate an alarming 347.9% net increase in infection risk areas. The models predict a massive colonization of northeastern Europe and high-altitude regions, with no current risk areas becoming unsuitable. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study demonstrates that L. infantum transmission in Europe is a highly dynamic phenomenon defined by seasonal thermal windows rather than static boundaries. The projected expansion towards northern latitudes challenges the historical notion of leishmaniosis as solely a southern European disease. These dynamic risk maps represent a strategic One Health tool, enabling health authorities and veterinarians to transition from rigid calendar-based prophylaxis to adaptive, evidence-based interventions. This is particularly crucial for identifying transmission periods in emerging transition zones, ensuring better protection for both animal and human populations in a changing climate.
PUBMED_42787100	PubMed	2026	Urban wastewater and sewage sludge as environmental sources of antimicrobial resistance, potential pathogens, and selective agents: insights from three European wastewater treatment plants. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a growing global human health threat, and it is increasingly recognized as a One Health issue, complicated by the complex interactions between humans, animals, and the environment. Wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) link human activities with the environment and may act as a reservoir of AMR, facilitating environmental dissemination. This study investigated bacterial communities, antibiotic resistance genes (ARG), and antibiotic susceptibility in wastewater and digested sludge at three WWTPs in Norway and Greece, representing regions with low and high antibiotic consumption and clinical AMR prevalence. Antibiotic residues and potentially toxic metals were also quantified. Of 21 antibiotics analyzed, 13 were detected in at least one sample, with ciprofloxacin, cefotaxime, and meropenem occasionally exceeding predicted no-effect concentrations. Removal efficiencies varied, with limited removal at the Norwegian WWTPs compared with the Greek facility. Potentially toxic metals were detected at all sites, with exceeded minimum co-selective concentrations for Cu, Ni, Pb, and Zn. Bacterial community composition was influenced by location, sample type, and sampling time point (p 0.05), and was associated with antibiotic concentrations. Removal of fecal and environmental indicator bacteria was 3.1 1.4 log CFU/100 mL at the Greek WWTP but negligible at the Norwegian WWTPs. Most ARGs (79%) were detected across all WWTPs, and clinically important resistance genes were also prevalent in outlet and digested sludge samples, suggesting considerable environmental spread. Antibiotic susceptibility testing revealed reduced susceptibility to all tested antibiotics, including 3rd generation cephalosporins, meropenem, and last-resort antibiotics, although enumeration and susceptibility testing of environmental indicator bacteria was limited by methodological constraints. These findings demonstrate that WWTPs can contribute to the environmental dissemination of ARB and ARG in both high and low antibiotic consumption and clinical AMR regions, highlighting the need for effective wastewater treatment, improved environmental surveillance and integrated One Health approaches linking human and environmental AMR compartments.
PUBMED_42778010	PubMed	2026	Urbanization impacts the environmental microbial community and its antibiotic phenotypic resistance potential by reshaping the diversity and network complexity. Urbanization imposes severe anthropogenic pressures on ecosystems, yet its impacts on the structural cohesion of environmental microbiomes and the co-occurrence of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) remain poorly understood. Here, we combined metabarcoding (16S/ITS2) with in vitro AMR screening of cultivable isolates across aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems in Nouvelle-Aquitaine (France). Random Forest models (RFM), co-occurrence and bipartite networks were used to quantify ecological drivers and evaluate network resilience via percolation simulations. While urbanization categorical diversity indices did not significantly differ between urban and natural habitats (p 0.05), RFM revealed that microbial richness is driven by distinct, continuous local gradients. Urbanization triggered structural compartmentalization of microbial networks, marked by a collapse in edge density, higher modularity, and eradication of critical connectors. Percolation analysis confirmed this fragility, showing accelerated network collapse under targeted attacks in urban settings. Conversely, the bipartite networks focusing on the environmental phenotypic AMR potential revealed an interesting paradox: whilst urbanization compartmentalized global networks, it significantly densified the bipartite AMR-network. This phenotypic resistance potential, structured around nodes of cefalexin, amoxicillin, and fosfomycin, exhibited increased topological robustness, a doubling of inter-domain connectivity (bacterial-fungal), and an increase in positive correlation. To conclude, this study reveals that urbanization induces a trade-off between the overall cohesion of microbial ecosystems and the topological robustness of specialized AMR-networks. It highlights the interest of integrating high-resolution network analysis into One Health surveillance of AMR, to accurately predict and intercept the AMR spread in anthropized landscapes, even if this AMR-network constructed using culture-based methods have limitations.
PUBMED_42785357	PubMed	2026	Urine Molecular Fingerprinting: exploratory study of a promising technology for detecting cancer and nonneoplastic disease in dogs. OBJECTIVE: To describe a novel technology, Urine Molecular Fingerprinting (UMF), for analyzing the composition of urine and its application for neoplastic/nonneoplastic diseases in dogs. METHODS: Voided urine samples from clinically healthy Bernese Mountain Dogs (n 263), Golden Retrievers (214), West Highland White Terriers (79), German Shepherd Dogs (21), and other breeds (245). Samples were analyzed using Raman spectroscopy and computational statistics. To illustrate the clinical relevance of UMF, samples from dogs with cancer (n 142) or nonneoplastic diseases (19) were analyzed and compared with reference UMF databases of clinically healthy dogs. RESULTS: Breed-associated differences in UMFs were present in samples from clinically healthy Bernese Mountain Dogs, Golden Retrievers, German Shepherd Dogs, and West Highland White Terriers. The UMFs of purebred dogs were different from those of a cohort of mixed breed/other purebred dogs. There were no UMF differences associated with age, sex, or neutering status in Bernese Mountain Dogs. The Raman intensity profiles of UMFs from dogs with cancer or nonneoplastic diseases were different from UMFs of clinically healthy dogs. CONCLUSIONS: Preliminary, exploratory studies indicate that UMF is a promising technology for detecting cancer and nonneoplastic disease in dogs. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Urine Molecular Fingerprinting may be useful in the detection of cancer and nonneoplastic diseases in dogs. This technology could be adapted for testing in clinics, supplementing clinical, laboratory, and imaging information used for health assessments. The use of liquid biopsy technology, such as UMF, in canine cancer detection is addressed in the companion Currents in One Health by Robertson et al, JAVMA, June 2026.
PUBMED_42726894	PubMed	2026	Vampire bats in Belize harbor multiple Trypanosoma cruzi genotypes: Implications for parasite transmission at the wildlife-domestic-human interface. BACKGROUND: Chagas disease, caused by Trypanosoma cruzi, is a neglected tropical disease with complex sylvatic and domestic transmission cycles involving vectors, mammalian hosts, and humans. The common vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus) is an obligate blood-feeding species that frequently interacts with livestock and humans, yet their role in parasite maintenance in Central America remains poorly characterized. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We analyzed 207 blood samples from vampire bats collected at two sites in northern Belize over three years (2019, 2021, 2022). PCR screening revealed an overall T. cruzi prevalence of 41.5% and increasing infection risks over time. The amplicon-based next-generation sequencing of the parasite mini-exon locus identified 36 unique haplotypes belonging to five DTUs: TcI, TcIV, TcV, TcVI, and TcBat. TcBat was present in half of the samples sequenced. TcBat and TcVI were detected in Belize for the first time. Belizean TcBat haplotypes clustered closely with Colombian reference sequences and a subset formed a Belize-specific clade, indicating previously unrecognized TcBat diversity in the region; in contrast, Brazilian TcBat sequences were more distantly related. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Vampire bats in Belize harbor diverse T. cruzi genotypes, including DTUs with established roles in human disease. Given their obligate blood diet, frequent feeding on livestock, and occasional biting of humans, vampire bats may serve as bridge hosts linking sylvatic, domestic, and human transmission cycles. Together with a recent report of an acute human Chagas disease case in northern Belize, these results underscore the need for integrated One Health surveillance of bats, vectors, livestock, and humans to better evaluate and mitigate the risk of Chagas disease in Central America.
PUBMED_42712876	PubMed	2026	VicMAG, an open-source tool for visualizing circular metagenome-assembled genomes highlighting bacterial virulence and antimicrobial resistance. Bacterial pathogens spread in clinical and environmental settings, and mobile genetic elements (MGEs), such as plasmids and phages, mediate the transfer of virulence factor genes (VFGs) and antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) among bacterial communities. Metagenomic analysis of environmental and wastewater samples using highly accurate long-read sequencing technologies, such as Pacific Biosciences (PacBio) HiFi sequencing, provides valuable insights into monitoring the regional spread of VFGs and ARGs, including dissemination mediated by MGEs. No visualization tool is currently available for the comprehensive display of numerous resulting circular metagenome-assembled genomes (cMAGs) with functional gene annotations. Here, we developed visualization of circular metagenome-assembled genome (VicMAG), a visualization tool for highly complex cMAGs derived from long-read metagenome assemblies annotated using updated databases of VFGs, ARGs, and MGEs. Using 353 cMAGs from PacBio HiFi sequencing of a wastewater sample, we demonstrated the utility of VicMAG for metagenome visualization. VicMAG provides comprehensive, size-aware visualization of cMAGs representing bacterial chromosomes and plasmids, annotated with VFGs, ARGs, and phages. By simultaneously visualizing all cMAGs in a framework, VicMAG facilitates a holistic understanding of the distribution and genomic context of VFGs and ARGs across complex microbial communities. This tool supports integrated surveillance of bacteria associated with virulence and antimicrobial resistance across clinical, environmental, and One Health contexts.
PUBMED_42788643	PubMed	2026	Virome Diversity and Zoonotic Risks of Haemaphysalis concinna Ticks in Northeastern China. Haemaphysalis concinna is a prevalent tick vector in Northeastern China, exhibiting a broad host range and the capacity to transmit over 40 human pathogens. Although numerous virome studies have investigated this tick species in Northeastern China, individual-level viral prevalence, coinfection dynamics, and the host spectra of the harbored pathogenic viruses remain poorly characterized. In this study, we conducted metatranscriptomic sequencing combined with TaqMan-based real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) validation on individual ticks to systematically profile the RNA virome of 112 adult H. concinna collected across Northeastern China. A total of 13 RNA viruses spanning six families and one unclassified group were identified, including four confirmed human pathogens, Tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV), Dabieshan tick virus (DBSTV), Songling virus (SGLV), and Wetland virus (WELV), alongside one potential human pathogen, Ji'an nairovirus (JANV). Individual-tick RT-qPCR assays revealed an overall viral positivity rate of 46.4%, with prevalence for specific viruses ranging from 0.9% to 13.4%. Notably, multiviral coinfections were detected in 10.7% of ticks (8.9% harboring two viruses and 1.8% harboring three), predominantly involving nairoviruses and rhabdoviruses. Phylogenetic analyses further confirmed that local viral strains clustered closely with endemic pathogenic lineages. Furthermore, literature-based host spectrum analysis demonstrated that these pathogenic viruses possess extensive vertebrate host ranges. Our findings highlight extensive viral diversity, high infection rates, and frequent coinfections in H. concinna, underscoring its pivotal role in maintaining and transmitting emerging tick-borne viruses and emphasizing the heightened risk of zoonotic spillover in Northeastern China.
WHO_18	2024-03-12T22:25:16Z	 the number of cases appears to be declining.</p>     "	WHO
PUBMED_42745009	PubMed	2026	What health are we talking about? Biodiversity as the missing link between One Health and Planetary Health. Health has become a central term in global sustainability policy, yet it is often used without sufficient conceptual precision. Public health, global health, One Health, EcoHealth, GeoHealth, and Planetary Health each emphasize different dimensions of the relationship between humans, animals, and the environment. In policy contexts, however, these distinctions are frequently blurred. We argue that biodiversity is often treated as an environmental co-benefit rather than as a foundational determinant of health. This weakens the implementation of One Health approaches because biodiversity underpins disease regulation, immune system development, food and water security, ecosystem functioning, resilience, and climate adaptation. At the same time, biodiversity provides a critical link between One Health and broader Planetary Health challenges, including global environmental change and the transgression of planetary boundaries. Future health and sustainability policies should move beyond generic references to health and explicitly recognize biodiversity as part of preventive health systems.
PUBMED_42745852	PubMed	2026	What will it take for behavior to change? Findings from a baseline evaluation of an intervention to reduce antimicrobial use among smallholder poultry farmers in Zimbabwe. INTRODUCTION: Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) occurs when pathogens become immune to drugs designed to eliminate or suppress their growth. AMR is accelerated by the inappropriate use of antimicrobials, a common practice among small-medium scale poultry farmers. We conducted a mixed-methods baseline exploration for an intervention to strengthen biosecurity practices and prudent antimicrobial use (AMU) among small-scale poultry farmers in Zimbabwe, to identify key baseline behaviors and their determinants as well as potential intervention entry points. METHODS: December 2024 to April 2025, we iteratively conducted 45 qualitative interviews and six conversation events with purposively selected farmers. To explore the underlying drivers of behavioral practices, the Capability, Opportunity, Motivation, and Behavior (COM-B) model for behavior change was applied as an organizing framework. RESULTS: Overall, five key behaviors relevant to biosecurity and AMU in the poultry sector emerged from the analysis: (1) incomplete adoption of biosecurity practices; (2) self-diagnosis and self-treatment of poultry disease; (3) prophylactic antibiotic use; (4) non-observance of withdrawal periods; and (5) unsafe disposal of dead birds and poultry waste. In addition, a cross-cutting determinant, gendered distribution of household and poultry labor, was found to influence multiple behaviors by shaping female farmers' access to time, resources and opportunities to implement recommended practices. Analysis of these behaviors through the COM-B framework revealed how capability, opportunity and motivation interacted to shape farmers' practices. CONCLUSION: AMU among poultry farmers is closely linked to a range of behaviors undertaken within production systems characterized by various structural and social factors. Interventions need to address the underlying drivers of AMU rather than its symptoms alone. Intervention components could include practical biosecurity training, low-cost biosecurity innovations, training on withdrawal periods, community-led disposal systems and, household workload-sharing strategies. The resultant intervention will need to be evaluated for effectiveness.
PUBMED_42782622	PubMed	2026	When the market moves: How stock market fluctuations shape risk-related behaviors at work. How employees' personal stock holdings perform during the day has become increasingly visible and accessible, yet research has rarely examined how fluctuations in those holdings shape employees' experiences at work. Integrating cross-domain spillover and regulatory focus theories, we propose that morning fluctuation in personal stock holdings spills over into the workplace by influencing employees' risk propensity-their willingness to take or avoid risks-and, in turn, their risk-related workplace behaviors. Specifically, drawing from regulatory focus theory, we propose that a more positive (vs. negative) fluctuation in personal stock holdings than usual is associated with subsequent increases (vs. decreases) in employees' willingness to engage in risk. In a 10-day experience sampling study of full-time employees who personally invest in the South Korean stock market, a more positive morning fluctuation in stock holding value than they typically experience predicted higher state risk propensity, which subsequently led to greater risk-taking behavior and voice. These indirect effects were moderated by long-term orientation, such that employees lower (vs. higher) in long-term orientation showed greater sensitivity to morning fluctuation in stock holding value. We then conducted two complementary experiments that supported the theorized regulatory focus mechanism by demonstrating that more positive fluctuation in personal stock holdings elicited promotion focus, whereas more negative fluctuation heightened prevention focus, and that these motivational states subsequently shaped employees' willingness to engage in risk. Together, these findings highlight employees' personal stock holdings as an overlooked source of daily behavioral variability at work. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved).
PUBMED_42749218	PubMed	2026	Whole genome sequencing reveals the co-existence of blaPER-7, blaADC-52 and blaOXA-91 in multidrug resistant ST164pas/ST234oxfAcinetobacter baumannii strains in Bangladesh. OBJECTIVE: Acinetobacter baumannii (A. baumannii) has emerged as a critical multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogen with the capacity to persist in diverse ecological niches. Environmental reservoirs in densely populated settings such as Dhaka, Bangladesh, may play a significant role in sustaining and disseminating antimicrobial resistance (AMR). This study aimed to characterize the genomic and phenotypic features of MDR A. baumannii isolates recovered from urban water bodies. METHODS: Three environmental isolates of A. baumannii were subjected to antimicrobial susceptibility testing, biofilm and serum resistance assays, whole-genome sequencing and analysis. Comprehensive genome analysis was carried out emphasizing on antimicrobial resistance genes, virulence factor genes, multi-locus sequence type, integron, prophage and mobile genetic elements. RESULTS: Phenotypically, all the three isolates showed serum resistance and biofilm forming capacity. All the three isolates were identified as ST164pas/ST234oxf. The antimicrobial resistance genes investigation revealed that all the three isolates had co-existence of beta lactam resistance genes blaPER-7, blaADC-52 and blaOXA-91. The isolates had gyrA (S81L) and parC (V104I/D105E) mutations associated with fluoroquinolone resistance. Several prophage regions were found in the strains and A. baumannii ML1 harbored AMR genes inside prophage regions. All the isolates harbored integron 1 in their genome. Comparative genome analysis of the Bangladeshi ST164pas/ST234oxf strains revealed a high degree of genomic conservation. CONCLUSION: The findings from this study highlighted environmental water bodies as reservoirs for MDR A. baumannii and emphasize the need for targeted One Health surveillance and improved wastewater management to limit resistance dissemination.
PUBMED_42737474	PubMed	2026	Whole-Genome Analysis Reveals Antimicrobial Resistance and Population Structure of Environmental and Veterinary Acinetobacter baumannii. Acinetobacter (A.) baumannii is an important multidrug-resistant pathogen increasingly recognized across animal and environmental settings, and carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii (CRAB) is classified as a critical-priority pathogen by the World Health Organization. This study investigated the antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and genomic characteristics of 122 A. baumannii isolates comprising 72 veterinary and 50 environmental isolates collected in Andhra Pradesh, India. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing, whole-genome sequencing (WGS), resistance and virulence gene profiling, multilocus sequence typing (MLST), core-genome analysis, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) phylogeny, and pan-genome analysis were performed. Overall, 58.2% of isolates were multidrug-resistant (MDR), and 41.8% were extensively drug-resistant (XDR). Sequence type (ST) 52 predominated among veterinary isolates, whereas ST2 was more frequent among environmental isolates. The presence of carbapenem-resistant isolates along with the ST2 lineage enhances the similarity to clinical A. baumannii. Several intrinsic resistance genes, including blaOXA-23, armA, aph(3 )-Ib, aph(6)-Id, tet(B), mph(E), and msr(E), were more prevalent in the ST2-associated population. Virulence-associated determinants were widely conserved. Core-genome MLST (cgMLST) and core-genome SNP (cgSNP) analyses identified highly related isolates within both lineages, while pairwise SNP differences were 0-7. Pan-genome analysis identified 4204 gene clusters and distinct accessory gene patterns between ST2 and ST52. These findings indicate that resistance gene distribution was closely associated with lineage structure and support integrated genomic surveillance of A. baumannii across animal and environmental reservoirs.
PUBMED_42721558	PubMed	2026	Whole-genome sequencing links a Salmonella Newport ST164 outbreak on Fernando de Noronha to prior circulation in the Brazilian poultry supply chain. Foodborne outbreaks at geographically isolated tourist destinations pose distinctive One Health challenges, combining limited local surveillance capacity, complex intercontinental supply chains, and high visitor turnover. In May 2021, a diarrheal outbreak linked to a gastronomic festival in Fernando de Noronha, that is a remote UNESCO World Heritage island off northeastern Brazil, was attributed to Salmonella enterica serovar Newport ST164. We applied an integrated genomic approach and epidemiological investigation to propose a transmission chain contextualizing and refining case definition of the S. Newport epidemic clone within national and international diversity. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS), SNP-based phylogenomic, pangenome analysis, Salmonella pathogenicity island (SPI) profiling, and resistome characterization was performed on 17 epidemiologically attributed outbreak isolates and 68 contextual genomes from Brazil, France, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The SNP analysis identified a 13 genome clonal core with less than 20 different SNPs demonstrating the possible connection between 9 patient isolates, 2 food isolates, and 2 food handler isolates, consistent with the involvement of colonised kitchen staff in cross-contamination of the ready-to-eat mussel dish. Three poultry isolates in 2020 from a mainland producer, 2180 km from Fernando de Noronha, differed only 13 to 17 Core-SNPs from the outbreak core, suggesting prior lineage circulation in the supply chain. Pangenome analysis also supports this evidence revealing near-complete genomic overlap of 4544 shared genes within the 5745 gene clusters (99.9%) between outbreak and non-outbreak backgrounds that mostly differentiate by a defense/prophage-associated accessory module. The resistome comprised intrinsic efflux determinants without acquired resistance and showed 35.3% of intermediate ciprofloxacin susceptibility. This One Health based study provides a WGS genomic reconstruction of a S. Newport ST164 outbreak at a remote tourist island, supporting the possibility of circulation from poultry-associated mainland reservoirs and findings consistent with cross-contamination at a gastronomic seafood festival.
PUBMED_42693390	PubMed	2026	Wild Felid Attacks on Humans in South and Central America: A 2014-2025 Case Series in French Guiana and Literature Review. Wild felids are apex predators that play a crucial role in tropical ecosystems. In South America, interactions between humans and large felids-particularly jaguars (Panthera onca) and pumas (Puma concolor)-are increasingly reported, raising public concern. However, attacks on humans remain poorly documented, and their frequency is likely overestimated. This study assessed the scale of wild felid attacks in French Guiana and South America through a case series and literature review. We conducted a retrospective observational study of all wild felid attacks managed in healthcare facilities in French Guiana between January 2014 and December 2025. Cases were identified through hospital emergency departments, the regional rabies treatment center, and remote clinics. Medical records were reviewed for sociodemographic data, circumstances, clinical outcomes, and management. A systematic literature review (ie, PubMed, ScienceDirect, SciELO, and LILACS) identified documented attacks involving South American wild felids from 1990 to 2025. Reports involving captive animals or lacking methodologic detail were excluded. Four attacks were recorded in French Guiana, with no fatalities, although 1 case led to significant sequelae. The literature review identified 11 events, mainly attributed to jaguars and occasionally pumas. Attacks were rare and often linked to contextual factors such as forest proximity, domestic animals, or impaired animal condition. Severe injuries were reported, including 3 fatal cases. Wild felid attacks on humans remain exceptionally rare in South America and are usually associated with identifiable environmental or anthropogenic factors rather than inherent aggressiveness. Habitat preservation and reduced human-wildlife overlap are key preventive strategies.
PUBMED_42744328	PubMed	2026	Wildlife health in the One Health era: lessons from a 200-year institutional case study. The One Health framework has drawn increasing attention to the interdependence of human, animal and environmental health. In this context, wildlife health has become more visible, yet its role remains inconsistently defined and is often framed primarily in terms of wildlife as a source of pathogens of concern to humans and domestic animals. This perspective reflects only a limited subset of the reasons why different sectors of society value healthy wildlife. Marking the 200-year anniversary of the Zoological Society of London (ZSL), a prominent institution in the emergence and development of wildlife health as a field, we synthesize historical, conceptual and applied perspectives to clarify what wildlife health means in practice and how it has been studied and managed over time. Our analyses show that wildlife health research remains dominated by disease-centric framings, with limited engagement with health as a state of comprehensive well-being. Using the Zoological Society of London as an institutional case study and drawing on six applied examples, we illustrate how wildlife health research can be embedded in policy and practice. We conclude by outlining key priorities for advancing wildlife health within the One Health era.
PUBMED_42706680	PubMed	2026	Work-family conflict to unsafe pre-work commuting: A road through sleep and affect. The potential for connections between work and commuting experiences (i.e. commuting spillover) is the subject of increasing attention in research and practice. Most commuting spillover work has focused on same-day associations, with little attention to the potential for work-related experiences at home to yield across-day spillover that impairs next-morning commuting safety. We map the process through which work-family conflict at home influences next-morning pre-work commute hard braking, emphasising the interceding roles of sleep and affect in across-day commuting spillover associations. In a 2-week daily survey study incorporating objective measures of unsafe commuting (N 50), we observed nightly work-family conflict to influence next-morning pre-work commute hard braking through next-morning positive affect extending from nightly sleep quality. We discuss theoretical implications of our findings for the commuting spillover literature and provide practical recommendations surrounding the implications of our findings for worker safety while commuting.
PUBMED_42753710	PubMed	2026	Wound-Only versus Weight-Based Rabies Immunoglobulin in Post-Exposure Prophylaxis: A Quasi-Randomized Asessor Blind Non-Inferiority Trial. Rabies is a fatal but preventable zoonotic disease that causes more than 20,000 deaths annually in India. Post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) involves rabies vaccination and passive immunization with rabies immunoglobulin (RIG). Traditional RIG dosing is based on patient weight, whereas wound-only administration targets local viral neutralization at the exposure site. In the present study, antibody responses were compared after a three-dose anti-rabies vaccination in patients receiving either wound-only or weight-based RIG infiltration as part of PEP to assess the noninferiority of the wound-only approach. Patients with category III rabies exposure were enrolled in this noninferiority clinical trial, all of whom received a standard three-dose rabies vaccination. Rabies immunoglobulin was administered either according to body weight or infiltrated only around the wound. Serum rabies-neutralizing antibody titers were measured at predefined intervals. The primary outcome was the proportion of patients exhibiting protective antibody titers; secondary outcomes included RIG usage volume, adverse events, and feasibility in resource-limited settings. Both groups achieved adequate seroconversion with protective antibody titers. Wound-only RIG infiltration produced protective antibody responses comparable to weight-based RIG dosing while substantially reducing RIG volume used and could improve feasibility. Larger studies, including formal cost-effectiveness analyses, are needed to confirm the clinical and programmatic implications.
PUBMED_42708070	PubMed	2026	Yellow Fever, an Arboviral Disease with Public Health Impacts: General Aspects and the Use of the One Health Approach in the Context of This Zoonosis. Yellow fever is a long-standing zoonotic arboviral disease that affects hundreds of thousands of people annually in different regions of the world, even though the vaccine has been available since the 1930s. Thus, studies that synthesize general and current information on yellow fever are relevant, aiming to disseminate knowledge that can contribute to mitigating its impacts. This narrative review synthesizes the general aspects of yellow fever, discusses its impacts on public health, and presents information on the use of the One Health approach in the context of this zoonosis. The databases used to select the articles were PubMed, Scopus, LILACS, and SciELO, using various descriptors related to the study's theme and objectives. It is important to highlight that yellow fever remains a significant public health challenge due to its high mortality rate in severe cases and the continued circulation of the yellow fever virus in tropical areas, especially in South America and Africa. Although many patients recover spontaneously, recurrent outbreaks continue in endemic regions. The initial clinical similarity to other zoonoses makes timely diagnosis difficult, and management remains restricted to clinical support, as there is no specific antiviral treatment. Vaccination and epidemiological surveillance stand out as the main preventive measures. Additionally, considering that the management of yellow fever involves human, animal, and environmental health aspects, the One Health approach stands out as a modern, robust, and effective alternative for addressing this zoonosis. However, the lack of knowledge regarding this approach among public managers and health professionals results in its non-use and, consequently, impacts the fight against yellow fever. Therefore, it is important to widely disseminate knowledge about the One Health approach, aiming at carrying out holistic actions in the human-animal-environmental interface sectors in the context of yellow fever, allowing for coordinated and sustainable responses at different levels and instances.
PUBMED_42767655	PubMed	2026	Zoonotic and prey-derived protozoa in Tibetan fox (Vulpes ferrilata) and other wild canids: Implications for public health in the eastern Tibetan Plateau. Enteric protozoan infections-cryptosporidiosis, giardiasis, microsporidiosis, and coccidiosis-constitute a significant global burden on human and animal health. Yet comprehensive parasitological surveys of wildlife in the eastern Tibetan Plateau, where anthropogenic, livestock, and wildlife activities extensively intersect, remain deficient. We collected 359 fecal specimens from wild carnivores across 98 random quadrats and employed molecular techniques for host identification and protozoan screening. Seven carnivore species were identified, with Tibetan fox (Vulpes ferrilata) predominating. Intestinal protozoa were exclusively recovered from Vulpes species, yielding a prevalence of 19.37% (68/351; 95% CI, 15.24%-23.51%). Eimeria falciformis (7.41%, 26/351) and Eimeria banffensis (7.12%, 25/351) were the most frequently detected, followed by Enterocytozoon bieneusi (3.70%, 13/351). Cryptosporidium was confirmed in one V. ferrilata, and Giardia intestinalis in 2 samples (V. ferrilata and Vulpes vulpes). This investigation furnishes the first molecular evidence that wild carnivores, especially V. ferrilata, harbor zoonotic protozoa including G. intestinalis assemblage AII and E. bieneusi genotypes PigEBITS5 and a D-like variant. The concurrent detection of Cryptosporidium yak genotype and E. bieneusi subgroup 1i in foxes, pikas, yaks, and sheep implies potential interspecies transmission at the wildlife-livestock interface. These findings fill knowledge gaps in regional parasite diversity and emphasize the need for enhanced surveillance of wildlife-borne protozoa under a One Health framework, thereby providing scientific evidence for zoonotic risk assessment and public health planning.
PUBMED_42754308	PubMed	2026	Zoonotic babesiosis: A One Health menace. Babesiosis is a disease caused by species of Apicomplexan protozoa of the genus Babesia. Species of Babesia parasitize the red blood cells of mammals and may cause clinical disease with varying levels of morbidity or mortality. Babesia spp. are naturally maintained and transmitted in hosts through their respective hard tick vectors, and a range of domestic and wild mammals serve as reservoirs for these parasites. Humans may become accidentally infected by some species of Babesia through bites from infected ticks or through blood transfusions and organ transplants from infected donors. Depending on the immune status of the host, humans can either remain asymptomatic (thus acting as carrier hosts) or suffer from clinical disease with varying intensities. Several known species and unknown or novel species of Babesia are being reported to be associated with zoonotic infection and disease. This Chapter discusses the transmission, pathogenesis, epidemiology, treatment and control of zoonotic babesiosis.
PUBMED_42742778	PubMed	2026	Zoonotic bacterial pathogens in global fish production: transmission, resistance, and one health control strategies. BACKGROUND: Fish and fishery products are central to global food security, providing high-quality protein and essential micronutrients to populations worldwide. The intensification of aquaculture, expansion of international seafood trade, and growing consumer preference for minimally processed fish products have increased human exposure to bacterial pathogens at multiple points along the production-to-consumption chain. AIM AND METHODS: This review evaluates bacterial hazards in fish and fish products using recent epidemiological surveillance, field investigations, and systematic reviews. Literature was retrieved from PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science, and priority was given to peer-reviewed studies and to international food safety agency documentation. Pathogens assessed include Vibrio spp., Aeromonas spp., Listeria monocytogenes, Clostridium perfringens, Salmonella spp., and Escherichia coli, covering transmission dynamics, virulence determinants, antimicrobial resistance (AMR), diagnostic strategies, and evidence-based prevention. FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS: Contamination occurs at distinct stages from aquaculture to consumption, with different risk profiles for each pathogen. Vibrio spp. and Aeromonas spp. are the main ecological hazards in marine and freshwater aquaculture respectively, with confirmed zoonotic potential and climate-sensitive distribution. Salmonella spp. and E. coli reach fish products chiefly through environmental faecal contamination, with multidrug-resistant strains reported across multiple continents. L. monocytogenes poses particular risk in ready-to-eat and cold-smoked products because of its ability to grow at refrigeration temperatures, while C. perfringens remains the least studied hazard in fish matrices. AMR among fish-associated bacteria is an escalating One Health concern, driven by antibiotic overuse in aquaculture and spread through horizontal gene transfer. Effective control requires coordinated One Health action: good aquaculture practices, HACCP-based processing controls, non-thermal preservation technologies, and harmonised AMR surveillance.
PUBMED_42750694	PubMed	2026	mcr-Mediated Colistin Resistance in Escherichia coli: A One Health Review of Reported Prevalence Across Human, Animal, Food, and Environmental Sectors. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a growing global health problem that threatens the effective treatment of bacterial infections. Escherichia coli is widely used as an indicator organism for monitoring AMR because it circulates among humans, animals, food, and the environment. As resistance to many commonly used antibiotics has increased, colistin has been reintroduced as a last-resort treatment for severe infections caused by multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria. The discovery of plasmid-mediated colistin resistance genes (mcr) has raised serious concern, as these genes can spread easily between bacteria. This narrative review synthesizes findings from 28 selected studies published up to 2025, covering more than 36,000 E. coli isolates collected from human, animal, food, and environmental sources across different regions of the world. mcr-positive E. coli were most commonly reported in livestock and meat products, with moderate occurrences in environmental samples and generally lower prevalence in human clinical isolates, although direct comparisons are limited by substantial study heterogeneity. These findings suggest that food-producing animals and contaminated environments represent important reservoirs of colistin resistance, whereas human exposure may occur through indirect pathways, although prevalence data alone cannot establish transmission directionality. Even with restrictions on colistin use in animal production and improved antimicrobial stewardship in many countries, mcr genes persist due to factors like environmental contamination and co-selection with other resistance genes. This persistence is influenced by environmental contamination, the presence of other resistance genes on the same plasmids, and global trade of food products. The available evidence underscores that colistin resistance cannot be effectively addressed within a single sector. A coordinated One Health approach that integrates human health, animal production, and environmental management is essential to limit the further spread of mcr-mediated colistin resistance and to preserve the clinical value of this critical antibiotic.